38
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
Report of the Board of Directors
SOCIO-ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT
After two years of pandemic-led disruptions,  
FY 2022-23 marked a return to normalcy in 
operations. However, geopolitical tensions, continued 
supply chain dislocations and climate crisis resulted 
in unprecedented inflation and volatility in global 
commodity and energy prices. Central banks across 
the world responded swiftly with sharp increase in 
interest rates within a relatively short time frame.  
As per IMF estimates, global GDP growth slowed to 
3.4% during 2022, well below projections made  
at the beginning of the year. Growth in Advanced  
Economies decelerated sharply to 2.7% in 2022  
(Vs. 5.4% in 2021) while Emerging Markets &  
Developing Economies grew at a relatively slower 
pace of 4.0% (Vs. 6.9% in 2021), mainly impacted by 
lower growth in China.
Going forward, the global macroeconomic 
environment continues to be confronted with myriad 
challenges; these include the continuing impact of 
the Russia-Ukraine conflict, global inflation remaining 
sticky and at elevated levels, recessionary pressures 
in most Advanced Economies, spectre of stress 
in the financial sector and the cost-of-living crisis in 
several economies, especially in the near term. As per 
IMF estimates, aggregate global economic growth 
is expected to further decelerate to 2.8% in 2023. 
Advanced Economies are projected to grow at 1.3% 
with major economies such as the United States and 
Euro Area set to grow at a slower pace than 2022. 
Emerging Markets and Developing Economies are 
estimated to grow by 3.9% in 2023 as against 4.0% 
in 2022. As priority of policy makers currently centre 
largely around inflation control, the monetary policies 
of central banks would remain a key monitorable in 
the near term.
The Indian economy remained a bright spot in  
FY 2022-23 amidst the global slowdown. Real  
GDP growth for the year is estimated at 7.0%  
(first half: 9.6%; second half: 4.8%) with Nominal 
GDP growth at 15.9% (first half: 22.3%; second half: 
10.5%), reflecting the inflationary pressures in the 
economy. While Agriculture grew by 3.3% in real 
terms, Services and Industry sectors grew by 9.4% 
and 3.6% respectively, on a soft base. With steep 
inflation eating into household budgets, consumption 
demand remained subdued in rural markets and for 
discretionary categories in urban markets. 
In spite of severe global headwinds, India remained 
one of the fastest growing major economies enabled 
by purposeful interventions by policy makers. The 
Government of India has continued its thrust on 
structural reforms to raise India’s potential growth. 
During the year, concerted efforts continued 
to be made towards shaping India as a global 
manufacturing hub through policy initiatives such  
as Production Linked Incentive (PLI), Make in India,  
PM Gati Shakti, National Monetisation Pipeline 
Management Discussion and Analysis 
For the Financial Year Ended 31st March, 2023
&
The Indian economy remained a bright spot in FY 2022-23 amidst the 
global slowdown. The Government of India has continued its thrust  
on structural reforms to raise India’s potential growth. 

REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
39
ITC Limited
schemes and strengthening the country’s digital public 
infrastructure as well as the healthcare infrastructure. 
Further, astute management of macros including fiscal 
and monetary policies also aided in mitigating the 
volatility in the operating environment.
While the pace of growth of the Indian economy is 
projected to decelerate in FY 2023-24 against the 
backdrop of global macro headwinds as aforestated, 
India would continue to be the fastest growing major 
economy in the world. Even as inflation is projected to 
soften on an overall basis, prices of certain  
industry-specific commodities are expected to remain 
elevated with continued geopolitical issues and supply 
chain disruptions. The year is also expected to witness 
‘El Nino’ weather phenomenon after three consecutive 
‘La Nina’ years; the impact of this on monsoon, 
along with related events like heatwaves, spatial and 
temporal rainfall distribution etc. will remain a key 
monitorable for agri output, inflation and consumer 
demand in 2023. A good Rabi harvest, broad-based 
credit growth and Government’s thrust on capital 
spending to bolster investment activity supported by 
buoyant tax collections, augur well for the economy 
going forward. Healthier Bank and Corporate Balance 
Sheets, improving capacity utilisation levels and 
structural reforms represent some of the key positive 
factors for revival in private capex. 
India is widely acknowledged as one of the most 
dynamic major economies in the world with immense 
headroom for growth over the medium and long 
term. A favourable demographic profile, increasing 
affluence, rapid urbanisation and accelerated digital 
adoption represent some of the key structural 
drivers of growth of the Indian Economy. Policy 
announcements in the Union Budget 2023 including 
focus on expanding digital infrastructure, direct 
benefit transfer, etc. are expected to provide further 
impetus to enhance India’s competitiveness, enable 
greater empowerment and foster inclusive growth 
while maintaining the path to fiscal consolidation. 
Sharp step-up in capital expenditure outlay, focus on 
infrastructure and promotion of exports are expected 
to boost domestic manufacturing, spurring a virtuous 
consumption-investment-employment cycle.
As the Indian economy combats uncertainties in the 
external environment, policy interventions focused 
on supporting sustainable livelihoods and fostering 
inclusive growth augur well for the economy. 
Structural support would need to be provided to 
sectors with large economic multiplier impact; the 
development of robust domestic agri and wood-based 
value chains hold special importance in the Indian 
context given their enormous potential to contribute to 
national objectives. 
Agricultural sector plays a crucial role in the 
economy with about half of the Indian workforce 
engaged in the sector. As reported in earlier years, 
enhancing agricultural productivity and value addition 
to international standards, while simultaneously 
improving market linkages, remain critical to enhance 
the competitiveness of the agricultural sector 
and drive significant increase in farmers’ income. 
India is the leading producer worldwide of several 
commodities, including pulses, spices, fruits such as 
bananas, etc. While India’s agri exports have grown 
sharply over the last few years to reach appx.  
US$ 53 billion in FY 2022-23, its share of global  
agri-trade remains low at only about 3%. 
Report of the Board of Directors
Agricultural sector plays a crucial role in the economy. Enhancing agricultural 
productivity and value addition to international standards, while simultaneously 
improving market linkages, remain critical to enhance the competitiveness  
of the agricultural sector and drive significant increase in farmers’ income.

40
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
The Agri sector remains vulnerable to the vagaries 
of climate change, facing considerable challenges 
as a primary source for food, fuel, fibre, fodder and 
livelihood security. According to an article in the 
Harvard Business Review, global food demand is 
expected to increase by up to 98% by 2050.  
An exponential increase in production and productivity 
will be required to meet the growing needs of 
an increasing population at a time when natural 
resources are fast depleting and the impact of climate 
change is becoming more severe. Evolving consumer 
preferences will also require nutritious food that is 
sustainably sourced. These developments accentuate 
the need to enhance the competitiveness of  
agri-value chains in order to cater to the dynamic 
market requirements of the future. India with its 
tremendous strengths in agriculture has a unique 
opportunity to play a leading role in this global 
transition and in forging an eco-system of sustainable, 
regenerative and climate smart agriculture.
Against this background, the Government’s initiative 
to promote Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs) 
as the core catalyst of agricultural transformation can 
indeed leverage economies of scale, enable sustainable 
agriculture, support market-led production and create 
larger market access. FPOs provide the power of the 
collective to small and marginal farmers. FPOs have 
a tremendous potential to serve as major enablers in 
augmenting farm livelihoods, by facilitating a crucial link 
between markets and individual farmers.
In this context, your Company has adopted targeted 
collaborative models to multiply the scale and impact 
of its agri and rural interventions. This collaborative 
approach, as opposed to a traditional transactional 
approach, can contribute meaningfully towards 
building next generation agriculture that is climate 
resilient and capable of supporting gainful livelihoods. 
Digitalisation of agriculture also offers the potential 
to increase productivity and foster structural changes 
across the value chain thereby enabling efficient use 
of resources. In line with its commitment to harness 
the power of cutting-edge digital technologies and 
unlock the potential of India’s farmers, your Company 
had launched ITCMAARS (Metamarket for Advanced 
Agriculture and Rural Services). This ‘phygital’  
ecosystem will empower the farming community 
and FPOs by delivering hyperlocal and personalised 
solutions by synergistically integrating NextGen  
agri-technologies. Further details on this transformative  
initiative are provided in the Agri Business section  
of this report.
The Government of India has inspired the United 
Nations to declare 2023 as the ‘International Year 
of Millets’. This has indeed drawn global attention to 
this ‘super-grain’ that has the potential to redefine 
agriculture with its unique value proposition. Millets 
are climate resilient crops using substantially lesser 
water than other staples and grow in half the time as 
other crops, offering a comprehensive solution for 
sustained food security.
Your Company has spearheaded ‘ITC Mission Millets’, 
leveraging its enterprise strengths in agriculture, 
food and hospitality to implement multi-dimensional 
interventions in this area. The holistic programme 
follows a strategic 3-fold approach – 1) developing 
a ‘good-for-you’ product portfolio, 2) implementing 
sustainable farming systems, and 3) enhancing 
consumer awareness through an Educate, Empower 
and Encourage approach. Your Company has 
implemented a focused strategy in crafting a millet 
Report of the Board of Directors
The Government of India has inspired the United Nations to declare 2023 as the 
‘International Year of Millets’. Your Company has spearheaded ‘ITC Mission Millets’, 
leveraging its enterprise strengths in agriculture, food and hospitality to  
develop a ‘good-for-you’ product portfolio, implement sustainable  
farming systems and enhance consumer awareness.

REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
41
ITC Limited
based products portfolio under its world-class Indian 
brands for every occasion, age and format. To cater to  
the diverse needs of consumers, your Company has 
launched products across traditional and modern 
formats viz. ‘Gluten Free Flour’, ‘Multi-Millet Mix’ and  
‘Ragi Flour’, Vermicelli and Biscuits under the 
‘Aashirvaad’ and ‘Sunfeast’ brands. Your Company  
has also designed products that suit every meal 
occasion like millet idlis for breakfast, biscuits & cookies 
for snacking and noodles & pasta for other meals.  
The thrust on millets is further exemplified by the Hotels 
Business creating easy-to-try recipes with millets to help 
encourage individuals experiment with the taste and 
texture of millets. 
In line with your Company’s commitment to empower 
farmers, your Company has developed a millets 
agri-value chain with special thrust on enhancing 
value-addition and market linkages. Your Company 
is also promoting FPOs in millet farming anchored 
by ITCMAARS. The Agri Business Division has 
implemented two Public-Private Partnerships projects 
in Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh, in partnership 
with Indian Institute of Millets Research (IIMR), 
Hyderabad. Your Company remains committed to 
supporting the Government’s efforts to promote millets 
given their immense benefits in terms of nutritional 
properties and attributes as a planet friendly and 
climate resilient crop. 
It is pertinent to note that a substantial quantum of 
food is wasted along the chain in India, depending on 
the inherent perishability of the crop and the season. 
Higher levels of food processing in the economy can 
create a much larger pull for quality agri-commodities, 
thereby reducing farm wastages and raising farm 
incomes. This would require focused investments 
in developing product-specific climate-controlled 
infrastructure as well as in branded products that  
benefit large agri-value chains. Corporate participation 
is essential not only to invest in requisite infrastructure, 
but also to provide assured market linkages to 
farmers. A big thrust on India’s Food Processing 
sector can play a pivotal role and have a multiplier 
effect which will lead to significant job creation, 
enhance rural incomes and help manage food 
inflation in a sustainable manner. In this context, 
the recently announced PLI Scheme for the Food 
Processing sector, with an estimated outlay of 
` 10900 crores, is expected to play a critical role in 
boosting investments, agri exports, farmer incomes, 
employment generation and building Indian brands for 
the global market. Your Company has been included 
under the scheme for several of its Branded Packaged 
Foods Businesses and in the Agri Business, details of 
which are provided in the subsequent sections. 
Similarly, the Agro-forestry sector, as a source of 
raw material for wood-based industry, is woefully 
constrained by policies that not only impede job 
creation in India but also promote avoidable imports. 
Recent policy interventions to enable greening of 
wastelands and providing financial assistance to 
members of marginalised communities taking up 
Agro-forestry is a commendable starting point to 
reverse this situation. Supportive policies in this 
area would go a long way in enhancing sustainable 
livelihoods, augmenting alternative sources of  
energy (bio-fuel) and enabling import substitution 
for wood-based industries while simultaneously 
augmenting the Nation’s environmental capital. 
The integrated nature of your Company’s 
business models along with strategic investments 
to enhance efficiencies across its operating 
Report of the Board of Directors
A big thrust on India’s Food Processing sector can play a pivotal role and have a 
multiplier effect. The recently announced PLI Scheme for this sector is expected  
to play a critical role in boosting investments, agri exports, farmer incomes,  
employment generation and building Indian brands for the global market.  
Your Company has been included under the scheme for several of its  
Foods Businesses as well as Agri Business.

42
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
segments - including agri-commodity sourcing 
expertise for the Branded Packaged Foods 
Businesses and cost-competitive fibre supply chain 
along with in-house pulp manufacturing capability of 
the Paperboards & Specialty Papers Business – is 
a key source of competitive advantage, especially 
against the backdrop of severe inflationary 
headwinds. Each of your Company’s Businesses 
derive benefits of synergy with seamless access to 
the deep & varied capabilities across different parts 
of the enterprise. Your Company’s interventions 
across operating segments are aligned to the 
national priorities of enhancing competitiveness of 
Indian agriculture and industry, generating  
large-scale employment opportunities and supporting 
sustainable livelihoods, driving import substitution, 
creating national brands to maximise value  
capture in India, accelerating growth in tourism, 
increasing Indian agri exports and promoting 
sustainable business practices. Investments made 
by your Company continue to be guided by the 
national objectives of ‘Make in India’ and  
‘Doubling Farmers’ Income’ and the overarching 
theme of ‘AatmaNirbhar Bharat’ that seeks to make 
the country stronger, resilient and more competitive.
The collaboration with NITI Aayog, aimed at boosting 
agricultural and allied activities in 27 aspirational 
districts of eight states under the Aspirational 
Districts programme, advanced to its second 
phase in FY 2022-23. During the year, over 10 lakh 
farmers were trained on package of practices for 
principal crops of the region as well as on livestock 
management, taking the cumulative number of farmer 
interactions to over 44 lakh. Estimates indicate yield 
improvement of up to 30% for cotton, maize, paddy 
and soyabean in locations covered by the programme; 
similarly, cost of cultivation is estimated to have 
reduced by nearly 15%, resulting in expansion of 
farmer incomes by up to 60%. 
Your Company has also partnered with the State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh towards improving  
the quality of chilli produced in the country to meet 
global standards. A Public Private Partnership 
programme - ‘Integrated Agri-Extension Platform for 
Chilli Farm Value Chain Development’ - has been 
conceptualised under which 40,000 farmers covering 
about 1,00,000 acres are expected to be benefited 
by 2025. In FY 2022-23, the programme covered 
over 17,500 farmers and over 72,600 acres across 
135 villages. Improved quality, farm productivity and 
higher share of farm gate sales enabled farmers 
covered under the project to generate additional 
income. 
Your Company is working towards developing village 
level institutions and fostering micro entrepreneurship 
by promoting custom hiring centres for farm 
mechanisation, post-harvest product management 
infrastructure and community managed seed 
banks for self-reliance in quality seed material. 
Environmentally sustainable farm practices, including 
zero-till sowing of wheat, direct seeding of rice, 
micro-irrigation and watershed development, continue 
to be promoted. 
The farm sector faces enormous threats arising  
out of climate change as evident from the growing 
number of extreme weather events such as droughts 
and floods. Given the vulnerabilities, it is critical to 
strengthen climate resilience and adaptability of the 
agri-food sector. In this context, your Company’s 
interventions in collaboration with CGIAR’s  
‘Climate Change and Food Security Programme’  
Report of the Board of Directors
Investments made by your Company continue to be guided by the  
national objectives of ‘Make in India’ and ‘Doubling Farmers’ Income’ and 
the overarching theme of ‘AatmaNirbhar Bharat’ that seeks to make  
the country stronger, resilient and more competitive.

REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
43
ITC Limited
to build climate smart villages were expanded to  
over 4,800 villages across 11 states covering  
10 lakh acres and supported farmers in the 
management of risks arising from erratic and extreme 
weather events. Further, according to CGIAR’s 
estimates, your Company’s Climate Smart Village 
intervention in Madhya Pradesh demonstrated average 
increase in yield of 38% and 15% in soyabean and 
wheat respectively, over the baseline. Reduction  
in cost of cultivation along with yield improvement  
led to an increase in net income by 93% in soyabean  
and 46% in wheat over the baseline and average 
Green House Gas emissions reduced by 66%  
for soyabean and 13% for wheat as compared  
to the baseline. 
In Kapurthala District, Punjab, your Company under 
its flagship programme of ‘ITC Mission Sunehra Kal’ 
has, over the last five years, implemented solutions 
that have effectively substituted the burning of paddy 
stubble by farmers. During the year, the programme 
covered 2.5 lakh acres with appx. 92.5% of the area 
(2.3 lakh acres) witnessing total stoppage of stubble 
burning, thereby avoiding appx. 1.8 lakh tonnes of 
carbon release into the atmosphere.
Although India has appx. 18% of the world population, 
its share of natural resources is disproportionately low 
with only 2% of global land mass, 4% of freshwater 
resources and 2% of forest resources. It is more 
critical than ever before to redouble efforts, both at the 
national and corporate level, to fashion strategies that 
foster sustainable, equitable and inclusive growth. 
It is your Company’s belief that businesses can bring 
about transformational change by pursuing innovative 
business models that synergise the creation of 
sustainable livelihoods and the preservation of natural 
capital while enhancing shareholder value.  
This ‘Triple Bottom Line’ approach to creating larger 
‘stakeholder value’, as opposed to merely focusing 
on uni-dimensional ‘shareholder value’ creation, 
is the driving force that defines your Company’s 
sustainability vision and its growth path into the future. 
Your Company is a global exemplar in ‘Triple Bottom 
Line’ performance. The focus on creating unique 
business models that generate substantial livelihoods 
across the value chains has led to your Company’s 
Businesses supporting over six million sustainable 
livelihoods, many of whom belong to the weaker 
sections of society.
Your Company sustained its ‘AA’ rating by MSCI-ESG 
for the fifth successive year - the highest amongst 
global tobacco companies. Your Company has 
also been included in the Dow Jones Sustainability 
Emerging Markets Index for the third year in a 
row – a reflection of being a sustainability leader 
in the industry and a recognition of its continued 
commitment to people and planet. Your Company has 
also been rated at the ‘Leadership Level’ score of  
‘A-’ for both Climate Change and Water Security 
(Asia and Global average at ‘C’ for climate change 
and ‘B’ for water security) by CDP, a reputed 
independent global platform for disclosures on 
environmental impacts.
As a testament to your Company’s ‘Triple Bottom Line’ 
philosophy and Responsible Luxury ethos, all major 
hotel properties of your Company are LEED Platinum 
certified, making your Company a trailblazer in green 
hoteliering globally. ITC Grand Chola, the 600-key 
super-premium luxury hotel complex in Chennai, is 
amongst the world’s largest LEED Platinum certified 
green hotels. In 2020, ITC Windsor’s best practices 
Report of the Board of Directors
Your Company sustained its ‘AA’ rating by MSCI-ESG for the 5th successive year - 
the highest amongst global tobacco companies. Your Company has also been 
included in the Dow Jones Sustainability Emerging Markets Index for the 3rd year 
in a row – a reflection of being a sustainability leader and a recognition  
of its continued commitment to people and planet. 

44
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
on carbon management distinguished it as the first 
hotel in the world to be LEED Zero Carbon certified. 
Since then, 11 more ITC Hotels have been certified 
as LEED Zero Carbon. ITC Mughal became the first 
hotel globally to be awarded the LEED Zero Water 
Certification by the U.S. Green Building Council 
(USGBC), followed by ITC Sonar, which is the second 
hotel to be awarded the certification globally. Further,  
your Company’s ‘Sankhya’ data centre in Bengaluru 
became the first data centre in the world to be 
awarded the LEED Zero Carbon certification. Also, 
the Kovai unit of your Company is the first site in India 
and the first paper mill in the world to achieve the 
highest platinum rating under the ‘Alliance for Water 
Stewardship Standards’. 
Your Company has been championing the urgent 
need to combat climate change for building a more 
secure future and the role it can play in enabling 
a net-zero economy. Your Company continues 
to pursue a low carbon growth strategy through 
extensive decarbonisation programmes across its 
value chain whilst also developing adaptation plans 
across its sites. Your Company is the only enterprise 
in the world of comparable dimensions to have 
achieved and sustained the three key global indices of 
environmental sustainability of being ‘water positive’ 
(for 21 years), ‘carbon positive’ (for 18 years), and 
‘solid waste recycling positive’ (for 16 years). With 
its bold Sustainability 2.0 agenda, your Company is 
setting the bar even higher, and remains committed to 
making a meaningful contribution across all the three 
sectors of the economy – Agri, Manufacturing and 
Services, while retaining its status as a sustainability 
exemplar. Further details on this subject are available 
in the Sustainability section of this Report.
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
Against the backdrop of a challenging operating 
environment as stated earlier, your Company’s 
consumer centricity, agility in seizing market 
opportunities, focus on execution excellence and 
proactive strategic interventions enabled it to post 
strong performance across all operating segments. 
Overall for FY 2022-23, Gross Revenue at ` 69480.89 
crores increased by 17.6%, while EBITDA increased 
by 26.5% to ` 23944.47 crores. Profit Before Tax 
and Exceptional items at ` 24677.54 crores grew by 
24.4% over previous year and Profit After Tax stood at 
` 18753.31 crores (previous year ` 15057.83 crores). 
Total Comprehensive Income for the year stood at 
` 18782.57 crores (previous year ` 15631.68 crores). 
Earnings Per Share for the year stood at ` 15.15 
(previous year ` 12.22). 
–	
The FMCG-Others Segment registered strong 
growth amidst subdued demand conditions. 
Robust growth was witnessed across all major 
categories of Branded Packaged Foods viz. 
Staples, Biscuits, Snacks, Noodles, Beverages. 
While ‘Fiama’ and ‘Vivel’ range of Personal Wash 
products and ‘Engage’ Fragrances performed 
well, the Hygiene portfolio witnessed moderation 
in demand with the ebbing of the effects of the 
pandemic, while remaining well ahead of  
pre-pandemic levels. In the Education & 
Stationery Products Business, notebook sales 
registered sharp growth with resumption of 
educational institutions. The Incense Sticks 
(Agarbattis) Business witnessed robust recovery 
during the year after two years of pandemic 
induced disruptions. Segment Revenue for the year 
grew by 19.6% with Segment EBITDA growing 
Report of the Board of Directors
Against the backdrop of a challenging operating environment,  
your Company’s consumer centricity, agility in seizing market opportunities, 
focus on execution excellence and proactive strategic interventions  
enabled it to post strong performance across all operating segments.

REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
45
ITC Limited
at a faster pace of 34.9% to ` 1953.97 crores. 
Segment EBITDA margins expanded by  
120 bps amidst severe inflationary pressures. 
The Businesses continued to drive improvement 
in profitability through multi-pronged interventions 
viz. premiumisation, supply chain agility, judicious 
pricing actions, digital initiatives, strategic cost 
management and fiscal incentives. 
–	
The FMCG-Cigarettes Segment witnessed 
sustained claw back of volumes from illicit trade 
on the back of deterrent actions by enforcement 
agencies and relative stability in taxes. Market 
standing continued to be reinforced through 
focused portfolio/market interventions and  
agile execution. 
–	
The Hotels Segment witnessed a stellar recovery 
during the year, clocking robust growth in 
Revenue and Profits buoyed by weddings, leisure 
and MICE (Meeting, Incentives, Conferencing, 
Exhibition) segments along with progressive 
pick-up in business travel. Segment Revenue 
doubled over FY 2021-22 and stood at 1.4x of 
pre-pandemic levels. Segment EBITDA margin 
stood at 32.2% representing an expansion of  
930 bps over FY 2019-20.
–	
The Agri Business Segment delivered a resilient 
performance with Segment Revenue and Results 
growing by 12.2% and 28.8% respectively. 
Restrictions imposed on wheat & rice exports 
impacted Segment Revenue. Margin expansion 
was driven by leaf tobacco exports and  
value-added agri products. 
–	
The Paperboards, Paper & Packaging Segment 
demonstrated strong performance during the year 
on the back of robust growth across end-user  
segments; Segment Revenue and Segment 
Results grew by 18.8% and 34.9% respectively. 
Segment margins expanded by appx. 300 bps, 
leveraging the integrated nature of the business 
model, Industry 4.0, digital interventions and 
strategic investments in pulp import substitution 
and proactive capacity augmentation in  
Value Added Paperboards segment.
The operating environment in the last three financial 
years has been extremely challenging due to 
disruptions caused by the pandemic, unprecedented 
inflationary pressures and sluggish demand 
conditions, amongst others. 
It is heartening to note that, powered by the 
ITC Next Strategy of building a Future-Ready, 
Consumer Centric, Climate Positive and Inclusive 
organisation anchored on the paradigm of 
‘Responsible Competitiveness’, your Company has 
emerged stronger and enhanced its competitiveness 
across operating segments through this period, 
and sustained its position as a global exemplar 
in Sustainability.
The Directors of your Company are pleased to 
recommend a Special Dividend of ` 2.75 per share  
in addition to the Final Dividend of ` 6.75 per share  
for the financial year ended 31st March, 2023. 
Together with the Interim Dividend of ` 6.00 per share 
paid on 3rd March, 2023, the total Dividend for the 
financial year ended 31st March, 2023 amounts to  
` 15.50 per share (previous year ` 11.50 per share). 
Total cash outflow on account of Dividend (including 
Interim Dividend of ` 7448.41 crores paid in  
March 2023) will be ` 19255.02 crores.
Report of the Board of Directors
Powered by the ITC Next Strategy of building a Future-Ready,  
Consumer Centric, Climate Positive and Inclusive organisation anchored on the  
paradigm of ‘Responsible Competitiveness’, your Company has emerged stronger,  
enhanced its competitiveness across operating segments and sustained  
its position as a global exemplar in Sustainability.

VALUE-ADDED AND CONTRIBUTION 
TO EXCHEQUER 
Over the last five years, the Value-Added by your 
Company, i.e. the value created by the economic 
activities of your Company and its employees, 
aggregated over ` 271000 crores, of which over 
` 183000 crores accrued to the Exchequer. 
Including the share of dividends paid and retained 
earnings attributable to government owned 
institutions, your Company’s contribution to the 
Central and State Governments represented appx. 
75% of its Value-Added during the year. 
Your Company has, over the years, ranked amongst 
the Top 3 Indian corporates in the private sector in 
terms of Contribution to Exchequer.
FOREIGN EXCHANGE EARNINGS
Your Company continues to view foreign exchange 
earnings as a priority. All Businesses in your 
Company’s portfolio are mandated to engage 
with overseas markets with a view to testing and 
demonstrating international competitiveness and 
seeking profitable opportunities for growth. Foreign 
exchange earnings of the ITC Group over the last 
ten years aggregated nearly US$ 9.0 billion, of which 
agri exports constituted appx. 60%. Earnings from 
agri exports, which effectively link small farmers 
with international markets, are an indicator of your 
Company’s contribution to the rural economy. 
During FY 2022-23, your Company and its 
subsidiaries earned ` 12783 crores in foreign 
exchange. The direct foreign exchange earned by 
your Company amounted to ` 10777 crores,  
mainly on account of exports of agri-commodities. 
Your Company’s expenditure in foreign currency 
amounted to ` 3163 crores, comprising purchase  
of raw materials, spares and other expenses of  
` 2950 crores and import of capital goods  
of ` 213 crores.
PROFITS, DIVIDENDS AND RETAINED EARNINGS

(` in crores)
Report of the Board of Directors
46
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
PROFITS
2022 - 23
2021 - 22
a)	 Profit Before Tax@
24750.41
19829.53
b)	 Tax Expense
	
–	 Current Tax
6025.32
4833.88
	
–	 Deferred Tax
(28.22)
(62.18)
c)	 Profit for the year@
18753.31
15057.83
d)	 Other Comprehensive Income
29.26
573.85
e)	 Total Comprehensive Income
18782.57
15631.68
STATEMENT OF RETAINED EARNINGS
a)	 At the beginning of the year 
30060.39
28210.63
b)	 Add: Profit for the year
18753.31
15057.83
c)	 Add: Other Comprehensive Income  
(net of tax)
(16.81)
23.66
d)	 Add: Transfer from Share Options Outstanding 
Account on exercise and lapse
20.82
315.34
e)	 Less : Dividends
–	 Final Dividend of ` 6.25  
(2022: ` 5.75) per share
–	 Interim Dividend of ` 6.00  
(2022: ` 5.25) per share
–	 Income Tax on Dividend paid (refund)
7702.03 
7448.41 
(20.43)
7077.59 
6469.48 
–
f)	 At the end of the year
33687.70
30060.39
@ Current year includes Exceptional items representing proceeds received 
in partial settlement of the insurance claim towards leaf tobacco stocks, 
which were destroyed due to fire at a third party owned warehouse in an 
earlier year.
Over the last five years, the Value-Added by your Company,  
i.e. the value created by the economic activities of your Company and 
its employees, aggregated over ` 271000 crores, of which over
` 183000 crores accrued to the Exchequer.

FMCG CIGARETTES
After two years of severe disruptions due to the 
pandemic, the legal cigarette industry recovered 
during the year with normalisation in the operating 
environment. Stability in taxes on cigarettes, backed 
by deterrent actions by enforcement agencies enabled 
the legal cigarette industry to partially claw back 
volumes from illicit trade. This in turn led to higher 
demand for Indian tobaccos and robust growth in 
revenue to the Exchequer from the tobacco sector. 
Your Company sustained its leadership position in 
the cigarette industry through its unwavering focus on 
nurturing a future-ready portfolio of world-class products 
anchored on its integrated seed to smoke value chain, 
superior consumer insights, robust innovation pipeline 
and world-class product development capabilities. Your 
Company continues to counter illicit trade and reinforce 
market standing by fortifying the product portfolio 
through innovation, democratising premiumisation 
across segments and enhancing product availability 
backed by superior on-ground execution. Several 
differentiated variants such as ‘Classic Connect’,  
‘Gold Flake Indie Mint’, ‘Gold Flake Kings Mixpod’, 
‘Classic Alphatec’, ‘Gold Flake Smart Mintz’,  
‘Wills Fab’ and ‘Lucky Strike’ were recently introduced. 
The Business also expanded its presence in focus 
markets with the launch of differentiated offerings 
across segments and strengthened its presence  
in Duty-Free outlets at airports. 
Globally, cigarettes constitute the dominant form 
of tobacco use. In the Indian context, tobacco use 
comprises a diverse range of chewing and smoking 
formats that are available at multiple price points 
consequent to punitive and discriminatory taxation on 
cigarettes. While India is the world’s second largest 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
47
ITC Limited
consumer of tobacco, legal cigarettes constitute 
only 8% of overall tobacco consumption in India, as 
against a global average of 90%. It is pertinent to 
note that India accounts for less than 2% of global 
cigarette consumption despite having 18% of the 
world’s population- making India’s per capita cigarette 
consumption amongst the lowest in the world.
Over the years, discriminatory and punitive taxation 
on cigarettes has led to progressive migration 
from consumption of duty-paid cigarettes to other 
lightly taxed/tax-evaded forms of tobacco products, 
comprising illicit cigarettes, bidi, chewing tobacco, 
gutkha, zarda, snuff, etc. It is pertinent to note that 
while the share of legal cigarettes in total tobacco 
consumption has declined from 21% in 1981-82 to a 
mere 8%, the aggregate tobacco consumption in the 
country has increased over the same period. As a 
result, despite accounting for less than 1/10th of the 
tobacco consumed in the country, duty-paid cigarettes 
contribute more than 4/5th of the revenue generated 
from the tobacco sector. 
Taxes on cigarettes remain one of the highest in India 
as depicted in the chart:
Tax per 2000 Cigarettes as a percentage of Per Capita GDP
USA
India
UK
Malaysia
Canada
Pakistan
Australia
Thailand
Russia
China
Germany
Japan
0.46%
0.75%
1.14%
1.14%
1.19%
1.37%
2.03%
2.10%
2.44%
2.66%
3.01%
7.70%
Source: Tax data – WHO Report on Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2021
Per capita GDP – World Bank (Data for the year 2020)
Legal cigarettes constitute only 8% of overall tobacco consumption in India. 
India accounts for less than 2% of global cigarette consumption despite  
having 18% of the world’s population, making India’s per capita  
cigarette consumption amongst the lowest in the world.

Taxes on cigarettes in India are multiple times 
higher than in developed countries viz. 17x of USA, 
10x of Japan, 7x of Germany and so on. Further, 
the same is also substantially higher than that in 
neighbouring countries.
It is pertinent to note that India’s per capita cigarette 
consumption is amongst the lowest in the world and is 
significantly lower compared to that of China, Japan, 
USA, UK and even neighbouring countries such as 
Bangladesh and Pakistan. 
marked buoyancy and grew by 10.2% during  
this period. 
Period
Increase in 
Tax Rate
Growth in 
Revenue 
Collections
FY 2012-13 to FY 2016-17 (CAGR)
15.7%
4.7%
Apr’18-Jan’20 over Jul’17-Mar’18
–
10.2%
Relative moderation in taxation in the subsequent 
period, backed by deterrent actions of the enforcement 
agencies, has helped the legal industry to partially 
recover volumes that were ceded to illicit trade in 
earlier years, benefiting all stakeholders, including the 
tobacco farmers, the consumers and the Exchequer.
Punitive taxes on the legal cigarette industry in 
earlier years have resulted in rapid growth of illicit 
cigarette trade – making India the 4th largest illicit 
cigarette market globally according to Euromonitor 
estimates. Over the years this has created attractive 
tax arbitrage opportunities for unscrupulous players 
indulging in illicit cigarette trade. While legitimate 
cigarette industry volumes have declined consistently 
over the last decade, illicit cigarette trade volumes, in 
contrast, have grown rapidly during the same period, 
accounting for about 1/3rd of the legal industry. 
During the year, there were extensive media reports 
on the multitude of cases of evasion of taxes/duties 
by dealers in illicit cigarettes which were unearthed by 
raids conducted by Directorate of Revenue Intelligence 
(DRI) and other enforcement agencies. ‘Illicit markets: 
A Threat to Our National Interests’, a study published 
by FICCI-TARI in September 2022, noted that 
“The consumption of illegal cigarettes in India has 
increased, signalling a shift from legal products to 
cheaper substitutes or illicit products, which have no 
Report of the Board of Directors
48
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
During the period FY 2012-13 to FY 2016-17, excise 
duty on cigarettes increased sharply at a CAGR of 
15.7%; however, tax revenue from cigarettes grew 
by a mere 4.7% CAGR during the same period. In 
FY 2017-18, the legal cigarette industry was further 
impacted by a sharp rise of 20% in tax incidence as a 
result of increase in excise duty and transition to the 
GST regime. Thereafter, relative stability in taxation 
until January 2020 helped the legal industry partially 
claw back volumes lost to the illicit trade in earlier 
years; consequently, revenue collections witnessed a 
Punitive taxes on the legal cigarette industry in earlier years have resulted in 
rapid growth in illicit cigarette trade, making India the 4th largest illicit 
cigarette market globally according to Euromonitor estimates.
No. of Cigarettes per annum
Source: The Tobacco Atlas – 7th Edition, 2022
1971
1133
898
897
468
394
90
"
China
Japan
USA
Bangladesh
UK
Pakistan
India
Per Capita Consumption of Cigarettes

or little tax element in them. When taxes are raised 
beyond a certain optimum level, consumers gravitate 
towards cheaper alternatives or illicit supplies,  
which are normally smuggled or tax evaded goods”.  
According to this report, illicit trade causes an 
annual revenue loss of appx. ` 15500 crores to the 
Exchequer. With respect to other tobacco products as 
well, the revenue losses are significant since about 
68%1 of the total tobacco consumed in the country 
remains outside the tax net.
The DRI, in its report “Smuggling in India 2021-22” 
acknowledges the high incidence of taxes in India 
providing opportunities for illicit trade of cigarettes.  
The report states: “High Incidence of tax on cigarettes 
in India results in a tax arbitrage in favour of smuggled 
cigarettes on which no taxes are paid and there is no 
statutory requirement of pictorial warning covering 
at least 85 percent of the packaging space. More 
importantly, the smuggled cigarettes are, on an 
average, 50 percent cheaper in the Indian Market, 
compared to the price of any similar cigarette brand. 
From a public health perspective, the smuggling of 
cigarettes also poses a very serious challenge since 
a part of the smuggled cigarettes are counterfeits and 
the quality of tobacco and other ingredients used in  
the said cigarettes, is inferior.”
Tobacco control measures in India have ranked 
amongst the most stringent in the world from the 
time of enactment of the Cigarettes (Regulation of 
Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1975, to the 
present. India is also one of the few countries where 
tobacco products are regulated across the value 
chain – from their manufacture to sale to consumers. 
The Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products 
(Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade 
and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) 
Act, 2003 (COTPA) requires cigarette packages to 
display the statutorily mandated pictorial and textual 
warnings covering 85% of the surface area of the 
packet - one of the largest in the world. 
It may be observed that smuggled international 
brands of cigarettes do not bear any of the pictorial 
or textual warnings mandated by Indian laws or, 
bear much smaller pictorial/textual warnings as per 
the tobacco laws of the countries from where these 
cigarettes originate. As reported in prior years, findings 
from research conducted by IMRB International, an 
independent market research organisation, show that 
the lack of pictorial warnings on packets of smuggled 
international brands of cigarettes or their diminutive size 
creates a perception in the consumers’ mind that these 
illicit cigarettes are ‘safer’ than domestic duty-paid  
cigarettes that carry the 85% pictorial warnings. The 
combination of low prices to consumers due to tax 
evasion and the misleading perception created by 
the absence of statutory pictorial warnings provides 
significant buoyancy to illicit cigarette volumes.
India is among the top three tobacco growing countries 
in the world. Tobacco plays a significant role in 
the Indian economy on account of its considerable 
contribution to the agricultural, industrial and 
export sectors2. The illicit cigarette trade also has 
a deleterious impact on farmers and farm workers 
engaged in the tobacco value chain. In India, 
cigarettes are manufactured largely using Flue Cured 
Virginia (FCV) tobacco grown in the states of Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana and Karnataka. As smuggled 
international brands of cigarettes do not use Indian 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
49
ITC Limited
1 Report on the impact of current tax framework on the tobacco sector in India 
and suggestions for its improvement - 2014, by ASSOCHAM and KPMG.
2 Report on Tobacco Control in India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, 
GoI, 2004 (Jointly supported by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
USA and the World Health Organisation).
As per the FICCI-TARI report, illicit trade causes an annual revenue loss of  
around ` 15500 crores to the Exchequer. The illicit cigarette trade also has a  
deleterious impact on farmers and farm workers engaged  
in the tobacco value chain.

tobaccos, in addition to revenue losses, the growth 
of illicit cigarette trade has also resulted in a sharp 
drop in demand for Indian FCV tobaccos in the 
domestic market. 
It is pertinent to note that several other major 
tobacco producing countries, including the USA, 
have established regulatory frameworks taking into 
consideration the economic interests of their tobacco 
farmers. The punitive and discriminatory taxation & 
regulatory regime on cigarettes in India continues 
to adversely affect the livelihood of Indian tobacco 
farmers with corresponding gains to those countries 
that have opted for moderate and equitable tobacco 
regulations. These developments, coupled with lower 
availability of Indian crop, lower export incentives in 
India and relative weakness of currencies in certain 
competing geographies have had a debilitating impact 
on 46 million livelihoods comprising tobacco farmers, 
farm workers, etc. who are dependent on the tobacco 
value chain. It is estimated that since 2014, Indian 
tobacco farmers have suffered a cumulative drop in 
earnings of over ` 7500 crores. 
As reported in earlier years, your Company and 
several other stakeholders had challenged the validity 
of the pictorial and textual warning covering 85% 
of the surface area of the packet prescribed under 
COTPA. The Honourable Karnataka High Court, by its 
judgement in December, 2017, held the 85% pictorial 
warnings to be factually incorrect and unconstitutional. 
Upon Special Leave Petitions filed by the Government 
and others, the Honourable Supreme Court has 
stayed the judgment of the High Court. The cases are 
pending before the Honourable Supreme Court. 
The extremely stringent regulations along with the 
discriminatory and steep taxation on cigarettes 
have had numerous negative, albeit unintended 
repercussions. These include:
–	 rapid growth in illicit cigarette volumes, which 
resulted in sub-optimisation of the revenue 
potential of the tobacco sector and significant loss 
to the Exchequer. It is estimated that on account 
of illicit cigarettes alone, revenue loss to the 
Government is appx. ` 15500 crores per annum.
–	 widespread availability of illicit cigarettes and  
other tobacco products of dubious quality and 
hygiene to consumers at extremely affordable 
prices. As a result, despite accounting for less than 
1/10th of the tobacco consumed in the country, 
duty-paid cigarettes contribute more than 4/5th of 
the revenue generated from the tobacco sector.
–	 a large component of tobacco consumption in 
the country, aggregating around 68%, remaining 
outside the tax net. 
–	 persistent negative impact on the livelihood of 
tobacco farmers and others dependent on tobacco. 
Studies by the Central Tobacco Research Institute 
(CTRI) indicate that on account of agro-climatic 
conditions, there is no equally remunerative 
alternate crop that can be grown in the FCV 
tobacco growing regions of the country.
Your Company continues to engage with policy 
makers for a framework of pragmatic, equitable, 
non-discriminatory, evidence-based regulations 
and taxation policies that balance the economic 
imperatives of the country and tobacco control 
objectives, cognising for the unique tobacco 
consumption pattern in India. Stability in taxes is 
critical to address the interests of all stakeholders of 
this industry, including tobacco farmers, consumers 
and the Exchequer.
Report of the Board of Directors
50
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
Stability in taxes is critical to address the interests of all 
stakeholders of this industry, including tobacco farmers, 
consumers and the Exchequer.

Manufacturing facilities of the Business continue to be 
modernised by inducting contemporary technologies 
to drive innovation and secure higher levels of 
productivity and product excellence. New benchmarks 
continue to be set in areas of quality, sustainability, 
supply chain responsiveness and productivity. 
Cutting-edge technologies such as Industry 4.0 and 
Data Sciences are being leveraged to build a smart 
manufacturing environment of connected systems. 
These initiatives, coupled with innovative capabilities, 
in-house design and development expertise, have 
further improved the speed-to-market of new launches 
and augmented the innovation pipeline of the Business.
It is extremely satisfying to report that your Company 
continued to be recognised for its commitment 
towards operational excellence. The Bengaluru 
unit won ‘Responsible Manufacturer of the Year 
Award 2022 – Platinum Medallion’ by Kaizen Hansei 
Institute, wing of Kaizen Institute of India. Two 
projects from Kidderpore and Saharanpur units, were 
recognised as ‘Winner’ under ‘Automation & Robotics’ 
and ‘Operational Excellence Leadership’ categories 
respectively by Frost & Sullivan.
In line with your Company’s commitment to the  
‘Triple Bottom Line’, the Business continued to focus 
its efforts for resource conservation and adoption of 
best-in-class technologies and processes. During 
the year, the Business continued to evaluate and 
adopt various sustainable inputs in its operations. 
Nearly 57% of the total energy used by the Business 
is generated from renewable sources. Various 
interventions over the years such as investments in 
renewable energy sources, and continued wheeling 
of wind energy through interstate open access have 
enabled the same. Sustainability initiatives of the 
Business continued to be recognised with Kidderpore 
unit receiving the ‘Excellent Energy Efficient Unit 
Award’ at the CII National Award for Excellence in 
Energy Management 2022. The 21 MW wind farm in 
Karnataka also received ‘Best Performing Wind Farm 
Award’ in Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh & Telangana 
by Indian Wind Power Association for FY 2021-22 
and ‘Performance Excellence Award for Solar and 
Wind Plants – 2022’ under the Wind Category from 
CII. Ranjangaon unit received ‘Shreshtha Suraksha 
Puraskar’ from National Safety Council of India 
under Safety Awards-2022 (Manufacturing Sector). 
Saharanpur unit won ‘IGBC Excellence Award’ under 
Factory Building category from CII. 
Your Company is well positioned to fortify its market 
standing in the legal cigarette industry, leveraging its 
superior strategies, integrated seed to smoke value 
chain, future-ready portfolio, robust innovation pipeline, 
cutting-edge manufacturing & digital technologies and 
best-in-class execution capabilities. A stable taxation 
and regulatory regime remains critical to enable  
the legal cigarette industry to recover volumes  
from illicit trade. 
FMCG – OTHERS 
With steep inflation impinging upon household 
budgets, consumption demand remained subdued, 
especially in rural markets and for certain discretionary 
categories in urban markets. Input costs remained 
elevated, even as certain commodities witnessed 
sequential moderation in prices towards the latter  
half of the year. 
Notwithstanding the challenging conditions prevailing 
during the year, your Company’s FMCG Businesses 
grew ahead of the industry in both urban and rural 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
51
ITC Limited
Your Company’s FMCG Businesses grew ahead of the industry in both 
urban and rural markets driven by enhanced distribution footprint,  
superior last mile execution, deep consumer insights, 
purposeful innovation and portfolio premiumisation.

markets driven by enhanced distribution footprint, 
superior last mile execution, deep consumer insights, 
purposeful innovation and portfolio premiumisation. 
Discretionary/Out-of-Home categories witnessed 
strong growth driven by agile innovation and relevant 
portfolio assortments across consumer cohorts 
and trade channels. Staples & Convenience Foods 
registered strong traction driven by region-specific 
interventions, differentiated offerings and focused 
brand investments. Health & Hygiene portfolio of 
personal care products witnessed moderation in 
demand, while remaining ahead of pre-pandemic 
levels. The first half of the year saw significant 
increase in prices of key inputs such as edible oils, 
packaging materials, soap noodles, fuel, logistics, 
etc., which exerted considerable pressure on margins. 
This was mitigated by adopting a comprehensive 
approach across the value chain focusing sharply 
on cost management, portfolio premiumisation, 
competitive trade and marketing investments, fiscal 
incentives (including PLI), supply chain agility, digital 
interventions and judicious pricing actions. 
Your Company’s FMCG Businesses recorded 
Segment Revenue of ` 19122.50 crores representing 
an increase of 19.6% over the previous year.  
Segment EBITDA for the year registered a robust 
growth of 34.9% to ` 1953.97 crores with margins 
improving by 120 bps to 10.2%, amidst elevated 
commodity prices. 
A consumer-centric approach, backed by a  
future-ready portfolio and agility in execution, remains 
at the core of your Company’s strategy to rapidly 
scale up the FMCG Businesses. 
The Businesses continue to leverage the power 
of digital to drive superior consumer insights & 
innovation, deepen consumer engagement and 
enhance brand loyalty. Your Company continues 
to make strategic interventions aimed at creating 
a futuristic platform to deliver delightful brand 
experiences seamlessly across touchpoints through 
personalised journeys mapped to individual’s needs, 
preferences and context. 
‘Sixth Sense’, the Marketing Command Centre  
and Consumer Data Hub – an AI-powered  
hyper-personalised platform backed by a robust 
partner ecosystem for content and data, is being 
increasingly utilised to gain insights on market trends 
and consumer behaviour, as well as synthesise the 
same to craft contextual and hyper-personalised 
brand communication and product development.  
Over 3,000 content assets have been deployed 
leveraging this capability within a relatively short span 
of time at significantly lower cost. 
Your Company continues to leverage deep consumer 
insights and cutting-edge R&D capability to address 
present and emergent consumer need spaces.  
Over 90 new products anchored on the vectors 
of Health & Nutrition, Hygiene, Protection & Care, 
Convenience & On-the-Go, Indulgence etc., were 
launched across target markets during the year, 
leveraging the R&D platforms of your Company’s  
Life Sciences and Technology Centre (LSTC) and 
agile product development teams across Businesses. 
Cutting-edge digital technologies including Industry 
4.0, Advanced Analytics, Big Data and industrial 
Internet of Things (IoT) continue to be deployed 
towards strengthening your Company’s real time 
operations and execution platform, and enhancing 
productivity, driving efficiency and cost agility. 
These initiatives are anchored on the key pillars 
of synchronised planning and forecasting, agile, 
resilient & efficient supply chain, smart buying & 
Report of the Board of Directors
52
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
Cutting-edge digital technologies including Industry 4.0, Advanced Analytics, 
Big Data and industrial Internet of Things (IoT) continue to be deployed 
towards strengthening your Company’s real time operations and 
execution platform, and enhancing productivity, 
driving efficiency and cost agility.

value engineering, smart manufacturing and smart 
demand capture and fulfilment. Strategic investments 
have been stepped up to build platforms of insights 
by harmonising and integrating large and isolated 
datasets powered by AI/ML technologies and  
‘human-centred design’ & visualisation tools. 
The FMCG Businesses comprising Branded 
Packaged Foods, Personal Care Products, Education 
and Stationery Products, Incense Sticks (Agarbattis) 
and Safety Matches have grown at an impressive 
pace over the past several years. 
Your Company’s FMCG brands have achieved 
impressive market standing3 in a relatively short  
span of time in their respective categories viz. 
Aashirvaad is No. 1 in Branded Atta, Bingo! is  
No. 1 in the Bridges segment of Snack Foods, 
Sunfeast is No. 1 in the Cream Biscuits segment, 
Classmate is No. 1 in Notebooks, YiPPee! is No. 2  
in Noodles and Mangaldeep is No. 2 in Agarbattis 
(No. 1 in Dhoop segment).
Your Company remains focused on rapidly scaling 
up the FMCG businesses anchored on strong growth 
platforms and a future-ready portfolio. It is pertinent 
to note that the chosen categories, which are largely 
characterised by low household penetration levels 
and/or low per capita consumption, offer significant 
headroom for long-term growth. This is borne out by 
several reports which highlight that your Company’s 
total addressable market expansion potential is 
amongst the highest in the Indian FMCG space.  
In this context, it is noteworthy that your Company  
is well poised to address value-added adjacencies 
and categories of the future by leveraging the  
25+ powerful mother brands it has established over 
the years. Recent examples of such brand extensions 
include Aashirvaad to Dairy, Ready-to-Eat, Vermicelli, 
Salt and Spices; Sunfeast to Dairy Beverages and 
Cakes; Bingo to Namkeens; ITC Master Chef to 
Frozen Snacks and Cooking pastes; Classmate to 
Writing instruments; Savlon to Sanitisers, Wipes and 
Disinfectant sprays etc. Simultaneously, the FMCG 
Businesses continue to make strategic investments 
in building categories of the future and establishing 
your Company’s ‘right to win’ by progressively scaling 
up those nascent categories where beachheads 
have been created. Your Company is also proactively 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
53
ITC Limited
3 Source: Nielsen, Kantar Household Panel
Your Company’s vibrant portfolio of over 25 world-class 
Indian brands, largely built through an organic growth 
strategy in a relatively short period of time,  
represents an annual consumer spend of nearly 
` 29000 crores and reach over 230 million households 
in India. These home-grown, purpose-led Indian 
brands, powered by agile innovation, support the 
competitiveness of domestic value chains, especially 
in the agri space, thereby ensuring creation and 
retention of value within the country. 
Revenue (` Crores)
FMCG - Others
FY23
FY22
FY21
FY20
FY19
FY18
FY17
FY16
FY15
FY14
FY13
FY10
FY08
FY03
15994
19123
14728
12844
12505
11329
10512
9731
9038
8122
7012
3642
2511
109
Your Company’s vibrant portfolio of over 25 world-class Indian brands, largely 
built through an organic growth strategy in a relatively short period of time,  
represents an annual consumer spend of nearly ` 29000 crores and  
reach over 230 million households in India.

pursuing value accretive acquisition, joint venture 
and collaboration opportunities towards accelerating 
growth and value creation. 
The FMCG Businesses continue to expand  
their export footprint leveraging the equity of their 
world-class brands – with a reach now spanning 
over 60 countries. Your Company also continues to 
explore strategic opportunities in proximal markets as 
a potential vector of growth going forward. The PLI 
scheme has provided further fillip to your Company’s 
exports across Biscuits & Cakes, Snacks, Dairy and  
Ready-to-Eat categories.
The FMCG Businesses continue to create structural 
competitive advantages and enhance profitability 
by leveraging world-class distributed manufacturing 
and logistics infrastructure, multi-channel distribution 
network and newer routes to market, smart buying 
& value engineering and smart manufacturing. 
Investments over the years in several state-of-the-art  
Integrated Consumer Goods Manufacturing and 
Logistics facilities (ICMLs) have laid a strong 
foundation to drive structural advantages such 
as ensuring product freshness, enhancing agility 
and responsiveness of the supply chain, reducing 
cost of servicing proximal markets through lower 
distance-to-market etc. Capacity utilisation at the 
11 operational ICMLs continues to be ramped up 
along with focused smart manufacturing interventions 
leveraging automation and Industry 4.0 technologies 
to drive operational efficiencies, yield and energy 
management and further enhance safety and quality. 
With growing scale, supply chain operations are  
being increasingly delayered through direct-to-market  
shipments thereby reducing freight costs and 
eliminating multiple handling. Your Company is 
confident that these strategic interventions which are 
already delivering substantial benefits will realise their 
full potential over the medium term and continue to 
create long-term value.
Your Company remains confident of rapidly scaling up 
its FMCG Businesses on the back of a future-ready 
portfolio powered by purpose-led brands,  
world-class quality, deep consumer insights,  
cutting-edge innovation and an agile, resilient and 
efficient supply chain. The Businesses will continue 
to leverage your Company’s institutional strengths 
viz. strong backward linkages with the Agri Business, 
deep and wide multi-channel distribution network, 
cuisine knowledge resident in the Hotels Business, 
industry-leading packaging knowhow and access to 
robust R&D platforms nurtured by LSTC. 
Branded Packaged Foods
Your Company sustained its position as one of the 
fastest growing branded packaged foods businesses 
in the country, leveraging a robust portfolio of brands,  
a slew of first-to-market products, a range of 
distinctive products customised to address regional 
tastes and preferences, supported by an efficient 
supply chain and distribution network. This was 
achieved in the face of a volatile operating 
environment marked by unprecedented inflation in 
commodity prices, global supply chain disruptions and 
climate change impacting crop outputs. 
The Branded Packaged Foods Businesses remain 
focused on addressing emerging consumer needs 
with innovations anchored on the vectors of health, 
nutrition, wellness, immunity, naturals, indulgence 
and convenience. The Businesses launched several 
innovative and first-to-market products leveraging 
superior consumer insights, capabilities of your 
Company’s Life Sciences and Technology Centre 
Report of the Board of Directors
54
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
The Branded Packaged Foods Businesses remain focused on addressing emerging 
consumer needs with innovations anchored on the vectors of health, nutrition, 
wellness, immunity, naturals, indulgence and convenience. The Businesses launched 
several innovative and first-to-market products leveraging superior consumer 
insights, capabilities of your Company’s Life Sciences and Technology Centre and 
the cuisine expertise resident in your Company’s Hotels Business.

(LSTC) and the cuisine expertise resident in your 
Company’s Hotels Business.
With the overarching vision to ‘Help India Eat Better’, 
your Company’s Nutrition strategy seeks to create 
a sustainable ecosystem anchored on a portfolio of 
healthier, affordable & accessible ‘Good For You/
Free From’ value-added products, supported by 
responsible policies in line with national priorities 
on nutrition. Your Company’s institutional strengths 
viz. strong agri business supply chain, product 
development knowledge of the LSTC and cuisine 
knowledge in the Hotels Business are being leveraged 
to develop products providing consumers wholesome 
and enjoyable food experiences.
Encouraged by the Government of India’s initiative of 
promoting millets, a range of millet-based products 
have been introduced. In the Staples Business,  
‘Ragi Flour’, ‘Gluten Free Flour’, ‘Multi-Millet Mix’ were 
recently launched under the ‘Aashirvaad’ brand.  
The Biscuits Business augmented its portfolio with the 
launch of ‘Sunfeast Farmlite Super Millets’, with two 
variants – ‘Chocochip Millet’ and ‘Multi Millet’ cookies; 
while the Confectionery Business also launched millet 
based ‘Fantastik Choco Sticks’. Your Company is 
further developing a comprehensive millets-based 
portfolio under its popular brands and in familiar 
formats to enable easier adoption.
The Businesses continued to make sharp targeted 
brand building investments to grow the core portfolio, 
address value-added adjacencies leveraging 
mother brands and scale up categories of the future. 
Clutter-breaking communication and consumer 
engagements, both in conventional and digital media, 
along with focused market development efforts 
resulted in reinforcement of brand positioning for 
your Company’s bouquet of world-class brands in 
the branded packaged foods space. The Business 
continues to deploy robust, scalable and secure digital 
technologies and infrastructure to enhance agility, 
accelerate innovation and drive impactful business 
outcomes. Several campaigns launched during the 
year received wide recognition and won prestigious 
awards across leading platforms, including the 
‘Innovative Integrated Media Campaign’ from The 
Advertising Club’s Abbys for Aashirvaad Multigrain 
Atta’s Happy Tummy Campaign, Gold for ‘Best 
Performance Marketing Campaign’ by Maddies for  
B Natural e-Commerce campaign, Gold in  
‘Innovation in e-Commerce’ for Aashirvaad Svasti 
Ghee, Gold in ‘Online Commerce Campaign for 
Customer Acquisition’ for Sunbean Coffee by 
Campaign India’s Digital Crest Awards and Silver in 
‘Best Content Marketing on Films’ for Dark Fantasy 
Batman Collaboration by Exchange4Media.
The Businesses continue to increasingly leverage 
‘Sixth Sense’, the Marketing Command Centre and 
Consumer Data Hub and generated more than 3000+ 
creatives and 50+ content solutions during the year. 
The rise of social commerce has enabled brands to 
engage with their target audience in a focused manner 
using social media. During the year, your Company  
leveraged technologies such as Augmented Reality (AR) 
for creating wider impact, worked with popular 
influencers, especially amongst the youth, and also 
commenced pilot campaigns integrating AI based 
solutions and technology. 
Relentless focus on delivering superior quality 
products to consumers continues to be a key source 
of sustainable competitive advantage for the Branded 
Packaged Foods Businesses. In this context, the 
Businesses continue to leverage the agri-commodity 
sourcing expertise resident in your Company’s  
Agri Business to procure high quality raw materials, 
thereby ensuring the highest level of quality, 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
55
ITC Limited
With the overarching vision to ‘Help India Eat Better’, your Company’s 
Nutrition strategy seeks to create a sustainable ecosystem anchored on a portfolio of 
healthier, affordable & accessible ‘Good For You/Free From’ value added products, 
supported by responsible policies in line with national priorities on nutrition.

consistency and safety in its products. In addition, 
each of your Company’s branded packaged food 
products is manufactured in HACCP/ISO-certified 
manufacturing locations ensuring compliance with 
all applicable laws and adherence to the highest 
quality norms. 
–	 In the Staples Business, ‘Aashirvaad’ witnessed 
robust growth on an elevated base and fortified 
its market standing across geographies, while 
addressing emerging consumer preferences for 
healthy products and catering to regional tastes. 
The value-added portfolio, consisting of Multigrain, 
Select and Sugar Release Control Atta posted 
healthy growth driven by higher salience in Modern 
Trade and e-Commerce channels. A differentiated 
range of products comprising ‘Gluten Free Flour’, 
‘Ragi Flour’, ‘Multi-Millet Mix’, ‘Organic Atta’ and 
‘Organic Dals’ continued to witness strong growth 
trajectory. ‘Aashirvaad Vermicelli’, launched  
last year, gained robust consumer traction; the 
range was augmented with the launch of  
‘Ragi Vermicelli’ during the year. Product portfolio 
was further strengthened with the launch of 
‘Aashirvaad Bansi Rava’, ‘Aashirvaad Samba 
Broken Wheat’, ‘Aashirvaad Double Roasted Suji 
Rava’ and ‘Aashirvaad Besan’. The Business also 
expanded distribution of Frozen Indian Flat Breads 
(Paratha, Naan and Chapati), hitherto offered 
only in international markets, in select domestic 
markets. Focused and purposeful marketing 
inputs, consumer activations and region-specific 
interventions supported by sharply directed 
media investments, especially in digital platforms, 
enabled further improvement in Aashirvaad’s brand 
health metrics. Powered by the trust reposed by 
nearly 74 million households, your Company is 
confident of sustaining Aashirvaad’s position as 
India’s No. 1 Staples brand going forward.
	
‘Aashirvaad Salt’ continued to strengthen 
leadership in key focus geographies and posted 
healthy growth across markets during the year, 
supported by its distinctive positioning – ‘Created 
by Sun and Sea - pure just like nature intended  
it to be’. ‘Crystal Salt’, the variant recently launched 
in Southern markets, scaled up to become the  
No. 2 brand within two years of launch.
	
In the Spices category, your Company continued to 
deliver robust growth with its endeavour to provide 
consumers unique and personalised experiences 
that meet their taste preferences and reflect the 
regional flavours of the state. During the year, 
the Business grew on the back of distribution 
expansion in focus states, sharp region-specific 
communication and an enhanced portfolio with 
innovative new products. The ‘Sunrise’ brand 
strengthened its market standing in the core 
market of West Bengal and extended gains in 
East/North East markets to fortify its position as 
one of the leading Spices brands of the region. 
‘Aashirvaad Spices’ continues to enhance its 
presence in emerging channels and core markets 
to enable full portfolio play along with expansion 
of the blended portfolio. Together, the two brands 
are well positioned to leverage your Company’s 
institutional strengths to progressively enhance 
their market standing in the Spices category. 
–	 The Biscuits category witnessed strong growth 
during the year, driven by robust performance 
of the core portfolio, scale up of innovations and 
the launch of several exciting and differentiated 
variants. The Business continues to strengthen 
its core portfolio with investments behind powerful 
Report of the Board of Directors
56
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
The Branded Packaged Foods Businesses continued to make  
sharp targeted brand building investments to grow the core portfolio,  
address value-added adjacencies leveraging mother brands and scale up 
categories of the future.

brand ideas, superior products and calibrated 
pricing actions. The Business augmented its 
portfolio with the launch of ‘Sunfeast Supermilk’ 
and ‘Sunfeast Thin Arrowroot’ in select markets. 
Emerging channels continue to grow at an 
accelerated pace on the back of superior product 
assortments and portfolio mix. 
–	 The Snacks Business sustained its robust growth 
trajectory during the year driven by the core 
variants as well as new launches. A slew of new 
launches during the year, viz., ‘Bingo! Street Bites’, 
a differentiated offering, combining quintessential 
Indian flavours of Pani Puri & Dahi Chaat in a 
modern format, lattice cut chips under ‘Bingo! 
Hashtags’ and refreshed packs of ‘Bingo! Tedhe 
Medhe’ namkeen portfolio, amongst others, elicited 
excellent consumer response. ‘Bingo!’ continued 
to be the market leader in the Bridges segment 
across the country, and in the potato chips 
segment in South India. 
–	 ‘YiPPee!’ witnessed strong growth during the 
year, aided by judicious pricing interventions and 
focused brand investments. The product portfolio 
was augmented with the launch of ‘Quik Mealz’ 
in a differentiated ‘noodles in a bowl’ format, in 
target markets. In line with the purpose of creating 
‘A better world’, the brand continues to promote 
sustainability through plastic waste management 
and recycling. During the year, more than 30 lakh  
school children were educated on plastic waste 
recycling with an initiative to collect plastic 
equivalent to 10 lakh YiPPee! Noodles wrappers 
across 100+ cities. The Business also organised 
the ‘Terra by YiPPee!’ contest, a new waste 
upcycling initiative wherein, contest winners were 
awarded tote bags/laptop sleeves/pouches made 
from YiPPee! wrappers.
–	 The Ready-To-Eat (RTE) category continued to 
scale up in the institutional and exports segments. 
Growth in exports was led by the ‘Kitchens of India’ 
range to the USA, Canada and other countries 
along with introduction of a range of ‘Aashirvaad’ 
products to target the Indian diaspora in the USA. 
Institutional business registered strong growth 
driven by acquisition of new customers, including 
Food Service segment, through a range of 
customised offerings. 
–	 The Frozen Snacks category under the ‘ITC 
Master Chef’ brand, which caters to both Retail 
and Food Service channels, continued to deliver 
industry leading growth, powered by a range of 
innovative and differentiated offerings. Over 65 
high quality and differentiated products distributed 
across both traditional and emerging channels are 
rapidly gaining consumer franchise. The portfolio 
offers a delectable range of Indian & Western 
snacks, Frozen Prawns and Frozen Vegetables. 
–	 ‘Aashirvaad Svasti’ fresh dairy portfolio comprising 
pouch milk, curd, lassi and paneer continued to 
gain strong consumer traction on the back of  
best-in-class quality standards, differentiated 
products and superior taste profile. These products 
are currently available in Bihar, West Bengal and 
Jharkhand markets. The value-added portfolio 
is constantly being enriched with launch of 
differentiated offerings such as ‘Litchi’ flavoured 
Lassi, select Indian desserts under ‘Aashirvaad 
Mithaas’, ‘Paneer Slice’ and organic range of 
‘Aashirvaad Svasti Ghee’ in select markets. During 
the year, the Dairy industry witnessed severe 
pressure on input costs. In spite of a challenging 
operating environment, the Business registered 
strong growth during the year. 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
57
ITC Limited
During the year, more than 30 lakh school children were educated on 
plastic waste recycling with an initiative to collect plastic equivalent to 
10 lakh YiPPee! Noodles wrappers across 100+ cities.

–	 With return to normalcy in market conditions, the 
Beverages portfolio witnessed a resurgence during 
the year. The Business continued to leverage 
the ‘Fruit and Fibre’ proposition of ‘B Natural’ to 
deepen consumer connect and increase brand 
affinity. The Dairy Beverages portfolio leveraged 
the strong equity of ‘Sunfeast’ and ‘Dark Fantasy’ 
to grow rapidly in target markets and in emerging 
channels. The Business has strengthened 
presence in rapidly emerging Direct to Consumer 
(D2C), Travel & QSR segments and sustained 
consumer facing partnerships with alternate 
delivery channels which aided the Business to 
deliver superior performance.
–	 The Confectionery category continued to nurture its 
range of premium portfolio by leveraging Fantastik 
Choco Sticks and ‘Jelimals’ and recovered to  
pre-pandemic levels. The portfolio was augmented 
with the launch of ‘Candyman Fruitee Fun  
3 in 1 chews’, a differentiated offering in the fruit 
bucket and has received encouraging consumer 
feedback. ‘Fabelle’ chocolates continue to receive 
excellent response from discerning consumers 
setting new benchmarks in the luxury and premium 
chocolate segments. During the year, availability 
of the gourmet range of Fabelle chocolates was 
enhanced beyond the ITC Hotels boutiques by 
leveraging e-Commerce platforms and food delivery 
aggregators in six major cities. The product offering 
at Fabelle boutiques across ITC Hotels was 
augmented with the addition of a range of bespoke 
eclairs. A new Fabelle boutique was launched at the 
recently opened ITC Narmada in Ahmedabad. 
–	 ‘Sunbean Beaten Caffe’, a unique ready-to-use 
beaten coffee paste that produces a rich, creamy 
and frothy cup of coffee, continues to receive 
favourable response from discerning consumers. 
During the year, a convenient powder format  
was also introduced based on consumer insights. 
The product has received encouraging consumer 
response. 
–	 Exports remain a key area of focus for the 
Business. Currently, your Company’s Branded 
Packaged Food products are exported to 
more than 60 countries. During the year, 
your Company’s exports of Branded Atta was 
impacted due to restrictions on export of wheat 
flour. Exports have since resumed under the 
Advance Authorisation scheme introduced by 
the Government. With its portfolio of winners 
and a high quality distribution pipeline, your 
Company is confident of scaling up exports at an 
accelerated pace in focus markets across a range 
of categories, leveraging the equity of its core  
brands such as Aashirvaad, Sunfeast and  
Kitchens of India. 
Over the years, your Company has made significant 
investments in setting up state-of-the-art Integrated 
Consumer Goods Manufacturing and Logistics 
facilities (ICMLs) proximal to large demand centres. 
These facilities are at the heart of your Company’s 
strategy to create structural advantage by enhancing 
product freshness, improving market responsiveness, 
reducing the cost of servicing proximal markets, 
enabling scalability besides setting new benchmarks 
in safety, quality and product hygiene. Your Company 
continues to leverage the benefits of the state-of-the-art 
Ancillary Manufacturing cum Logistics Facilities 
(AMLFs) at Pudukkottai and Kapurthala. These 
automated facilities are co-located with the ICMLs 
and provide several structural advantages including 
inventory optimisation, delayering operations and 
lowering cost of market servicing.
Report of the Board of Directors
58
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
The Branded Packaged Foods Businesses export to more than 60 countries.  
With its portfolio of winners and a high quality distribution pipeline, your Company  
is confident of scaling up exports at an accelerated pace in focus markets across  
a range of categories, leveraging the equity of its core brands  
such as Aashirvaad, Sunfeast and Kitchens of India.

Your Company recently commissioned a new  
ICML at Khordha, Odisha. With this, 11 ICMLs are 
operational in locations proximal to large demand 
centres enabling delivery of fresher products, 
reduction in distance to market and delayering of 
operations. The capacity utilisation at existing ICMLs 
continues to be ramped up. With every successive 
ICML coming on-stream, the representation of  
women in the workforce has progressively increased. 
The ICML units received several prestigious awards 
and accolades from leading industry bodies such 
as the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), 
International Research Institute for Manufacturing 
(IRIM), Integrated Manufacturing Excellence 
Initiative (IMexI), National Safety Council of India 
(NSCI), Ministry of Labour and Employment, etc. for 
their high standards of safety, quality, operational 
excellence and benchmarks in green and sustainable 
manufacturing. The Malur unit became the first food 
processing facility in Asia to be awarded the AWS 
Platinum-level certification, the gold standard for 
water stewardship in the world. These accolades are 
testament to your Company’s unwavering commitment 
to providing products with the highest levels of quality 
while reducing the environmental impact of the same.
The Business implemented several strategic cost 
management initiatives in areas such as supply chain 
optimisation, smart procurement and productivity 
improvement through automation, leveraging new-age 
technologies such as Industry 4.0 and smart utilities. 
These interventions helped mitigate the unprecedented 
cost inflation witnessed during the year and also offset 
start-up costs of new facilities and strategic investments 
in brand building for gestating categories.
With the growing importance of processed food 
products in the consumer basket, the food processing 
industry has significant potential to transform the 
agriculture sector through increased market linkages, 
improvement in the efficiency of resource use, 
enhancement in the farmer incomes, expansion of 
exports and generation of employment opportunities. 
Development of the food processing sector will aid 
in addressing issues of food security and inflation, 
improved nutrition availability and prevention of 
wastage, amongst others. 
Recognising this potential and headroom for growth 
in the Indian market, your Company has made 
significant investments in food processing and 
remains focused on establishing itself as the leading 
player in the branded packaged foods industry. 
The Government’s Production Linked Incentives 
(PLI) Scheme for the food processing industry will 
incentivise fresh investments, enable building Indian 
brands for the global market, promote exports and 
boost farmer incomes. Your Company has been 
included under the PLI Scheme towards sales-based 
incentives in the Ready to Eat, Fruits & Vegetables 
and Marine categories respectively as well as for 
incentives towards expenditure incurred for branding 
and marketing in export markets. Your Company is 
confident of meeting the requisite investment and 
sales growth targets towards the same. In line with the 
Government’s initiatives towards promoting millets, 
a PLI scheme for millet-based products has also 
been introduced during the year. Your Company has 
been included under the PLI Scheme for millet-based 
products as well. 
Your Company is well poised to strengthen its position 
as one of the fastest growing food companies and 
the ‘most trusted provider of food products’ in the 
Indian market in line with its purpose to ‘Help India 
Eat Better’. Your Company remains confident of 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
59
ITC Limited
11 ICMLs are operational in locations proximal to large demand centres enabling 
delivery of fresher products, reduction in distance to market and delayering of  
operations. With every successive ICML coming on-stream, the representation  
of women in the workforce has progressively increased. The Malur unit  
became the first food processing facility in Asia to be awarded  
the AWS Platinum-level certification for water stewardship.

rapidly scaling up the Branded Packaged Foods 
Businesses leveraging the strong growth platforms 
nurtured over the years in chosen categories which 
offer immense headroom for growth and powerful 
purpose-led mother brands that have the potential 
to be extended to address opportunities in adjacent 
spaces. In addition, your Company’s deep & wide 
multi-channel distribution network, with growing 
presence in emerging channels such as e-Commerce, 
Modern Trade, On-the-go and Institutional sales, 
continues to deliver competitive advantage through 
superior product availability, visibility and freshness. 
Recent investments in establishing a world-class 
distributed manufacturing footprint have created a 
solid foundation to secure structural advantage over 
time. Cutting-edge R&D platforms of your Company’s 
LSTC are driving agile innovation and faster 
turnaround times for introduction of differentiated & 
first-to-market products catering to constantly evolving 
consumer needs. Investments in leading-edge digital 
technologies and platforms continue to be stepped up 
across the value chain to drive competitive advantage.
Personal Care Products 
Your Company’s Personal Care Products Business 
continued to strengthen its core strategic levers  
of building brands with purpose, introducing  
first-in-category innovations, focusing on categories 
of the future and accelerating presence in emerging 
channels. Hyper-inflationary pressure on prices of key 
inputs witnessed in the previous year continued to 
impact the industry for most of the financial year.  
The surge in inflation also led to moderation in 
demand, especially in rural markets; however, 
progressive improvement was witnessed during the 
course of the year. Portfolio premiumisation, launch 
of innovative and differentiated range of products and 
agility in mitigating the impact of commodity inflation 
enabled the Business to strengthen the core and  
grow emerging categories during the year, in spite of 
a challenging operating environment. 
In the Personal Wash segment, premiumisation 
continues to remain a key lever of growth. During 
the year, ‘Fiama’ registered strong growth fuelled 
by investments in brand building, wider distribution 
and growth across channels. Fiama gel bar format 
witnessed significant gains during the year, whilst 
providing consumers a differentiated and compelling 
offering. A new range of ‘Happy Naturals’ Perfume 
mists and Shower Gels were launched during the  
year to meet the growing demand for ‘Naturals’.  
The portfolio was further augmented with launch of 
‘Deep Clean Charcoal and Grapefruit’ range of gel 
bathing bars and shower gel, exclusively for men. The 
brand continued building on promoting mental wellness  
while improving access to mental health experts.
The ‘Vivel’ range of soaps continued to build 
momentum and posted healthy growth during  
the year. The premium ‘VedVidya’ range was 
launched during the year in three variants –  
‘Nargis & Kumkumadi oil’, ‘Nagarmotha & 
Bahumanjari oil’, ‘Chandan & Badamam oil’. Vivel’s 
proposition of empowerment of women through the 
#AbSamjhautaNahi campaign continues to resonate 
well with target consumers. 
The Fragrance category witnessed strong growth 
across segments with the premium range of  
‘Engage’ perfumes garnering encouraging response. 
The Business launched a new premium EDP range 
with best-in-class fragrances for occasion-based use 
which includes a differentiated ‘gender neutral’ variant 
‘One Soul’. In the popular segment, Deo sprays were 
also launched in the mini-can format. 
Report of the Board of Directors
60
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
Your Company’s Personal Care Products Business continued to  
strengthen its core strategic levers of building brands with purpose, 
introducing first-in-category innovations, focusing on categories  
of the future and accelerating presence in emerging channels.

The ‘Savlon’ portfolio witnessed moderation in 
demand with the waning of the pandemic, while 
remaining above pre-pandemic levels. Sustained 
focus on distribution expansion, proactive cost 
management, enhanced supply chain responsiveness 
with a range of exciting offerings enabled the 
Business to augment its germ-protection equity. 
Savlon powder handwash, in a convenient low unit 
pack format, witnessed strong traction amongst  
target consumers.
The Business continued to expand its presence 
in the Home Hygiene segment by leveraging the 
‘Nimyle’ brand. During the year, Nimyle strengthened 
its leadership position in core markets. The brand 
continued to demonstrate robust growth in emerging 
channels on the back of its unique proposition of 
‘100% Natural Action’. 
Under the Skincare portfolio, ‘Dermafique’ introduced 
an AI powered smart skin advisor to provide 
personalised skin health analysis, empowering 
individuals to know their skin better and adopt 
solutions suited to unique skin needs. During the 
year, the brand launched its D2C platform to deepen 
consumer engagement based on sharp consumer 
insights and drive revenue growth. The brand also 
strengthened its equity through relevant product benefit 
communications, leveraging influencers to drive buzz 
and engagement, running digital campaigns etc.,  
which is visible in strong conversions and repeat rates 
on digital platforms.
The Business bolstered its presence in the rapidly 
growing e-Commerce channel and continues to widen 
its assortment of offerings tailored to consumer needs. 
With reinforced focus on footprint expansion, salience 
of the e-Commerce channel for the Business stood 
at double digits. The proliferation of digital access 
and rapid evolution of ‘beauty tech’ have opened 
up opportunities for providing relevant personalised 
experiences to consumers. The Business continues to 
drive a range of Digital Marketing initiatives to target 
relevant consumer cohorts.
In order to further strengthen its presence in the  
D2C segment, your Company acquired a minority 
stake in ‘Mylo’ – a digital start-up, which offers  
science backed, expert-led solutions primarily  
in the mother and baby care segments. In addition, 
further investments were made during the year in  
‘Mother Sparsh’, a premium ayurvedic and natural 
personal care start-up to support the company’s 
growth plans.
Your Company is setting up a state-of-the-art  
Personal Care and Home Care products manufacturing 
unit in Uluberia, in line with its strategy of building 
in-house manufacturing capabilities for products with 
unique formulations, enhancing supply chain agility 
and responsiveness and reducing distance to market. 
Fiama, Vivel and Savlon have been frontrunners in 
adopting sustainable packaging for the soap portfolio. 
The Fiama and Vivel wrapped soap portfolio has also 
transitioned to re-cyclable mono material while Savlon 
soap wrappers now contain 70% recycled plastic in 
the PET film used. Sustainable materials are being 
used for in-store merchandising for Fiama and Vivel 
soaps. Further, Fiama Shower Gel and Handwash 
bottles are now made with 50% Post-Consumer 
Recycled (PCR) material.
The state-of-the-art R&D facility of your Company 
continued to leverage cross functional collaborations 
to develop innovative and differentiated products 
backed by robust science-based claims, to meet the 
emerging consumer needs. 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
61
ITC Limited
Fiama, Vivel and Savlon have been frontrunners in adopting sustainable packaging. 
The Fiama and Vivel wrapped soap portfolio has also transitioned to re-cyclable  
mono material while Savlon soap wrappers now contain 70% recycled plastic  
in the PET film used. Fiama Shower Gel and Handwash bottles are now  
made with 50% Post-Consumer Recycled (PCR) material.

Your Company received accolades in the field of Digital 
and Marketing excellence. Vivel’s #WorkForHome 
campaign, celebrating the relentless and unconditional 
contribution of homemakers and encouraging equality, 
won a ‘Silver’ at the ‘Digixx 2022 Awards’ and a  
‘Gold’ at the ‘ACEF 2022 Awards’. Further, Vivel’s 
Bodywash was awarded the ‘Campaign India Digital 
Crest Silver Award’ for use of social media on 
‘Sharechat’. Engage ‘Pocketful O’Stories 3.0’  
bagged 2 ‘Golds’ for best use of social media for UGC  
(User Generated Content) in the ‘ET Digi+ 2023 Awards’ 
and in ‘AFAQs Digies 2023 Awards’. 
Your Company’s strategic focus continues to be on 
expanding the core categories of Personal Wash, 
Fragrance and Homecare through innovative, 
differentiated and consumer centric products, highest 
levels of product quality and impactful communication. 
Your Company, with its future-ready portfolio and 
purpose-led brands, is well positioned to seize growth 
opportunities and emerge as a significant player in 
this space.
Education and Stationery Products
The Education and Stationery Products industry 
recorded a strong recovery with progressive 
resumption of physical classes at educational 
institutions and demand recovering to pre-pandemic 
levels. However, on the supply side, industry had to 
contend with unprecedented inflationary pressures. 
The Business strengthened its market leadership 
position in the industry, delivering a competitively 
superior performance driven by portfolio premiumisation, 
judicious pricing actions and continued focus on 
cost and working capital management, leveraging 
institutional strengths such as backward integration in 
the value chain for supply of paper and paperboard 
and multi-channel distribution infrastructure. 
The Business continued to leverage its innovation 
platform in collaboration with your Company’s Life 
Sciences and Technology Centre to craft differentiated 
products of superior quality. 
The ‘Classmate Interaktiv’ Notebooks portfolio was 
augmented with the launch of over 40 differentiated 
variants under the Origami range. Extensive 
consumer engagement with 1,000+ schools and  
2 Lakh+ students through craft-based competitions 
enabled Classmate to fortify its position as an 
innovation leader in the industry. In the youth and 
college segment, the Business accelerated the 
adoption of ‘Classmate Pulse’ spiral format through 
activations and driving new consumption segments. 
The ‘Paperkraft’ portfolio was further scaled up with 
launch of ‘Paperkraft Vintage Kraft’ cover series for 
leisure writing and ‘Paperkraft Debossed PU’  
series with motivational quotes. The Writing 
Instruments portfolio was bolstered with the launch 
of ‘Classmate Hook’ pens, a unique innovation that 
enhances the brand’s visibility and appeal. 
To promote holistic learning in line with the National 
Education Policy 2020, an inter school initiative 
‘Classmate All Rounder’ was conceptualised providing 
students with a platform to nurture and showcase 
their varied skills. The initiative received tremendous 
response with over 3 Lakh students across  
1000+ schools participating in the very first edition. 
The multi-channel capability of your Company’s 
strong distribution network was leveraged to enhance 
availability and drive sales. The Business sustained 
its leadership position on e-Commerce platforms 
through consistent availability of a wide assortment of 
products, backed by focused interventions to enhance 
consumer traction. Consumer engagement was 
further enhanced through Classmateshop.com,  
Report of the Board of Directors
62
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
The ‘Classmate Interaktiv’ Notebooks portfolio was augmented with the launch of 
over 40 differentiated variants under the Origami range. Extensive consumer 
engagement with 1,000+ schools and 2 Lakh+ students through craft-based 
competitions enabled Classmate to fortify its position  
as an innovation leader in the industry.

a D2C platform, which facilitates brand affinity through 
creative product personalisations. Industry-first 
propositions such as personalised videos and  
AI (Artificial Intelligence) generated cover designs 
further enhanced consumer engagement. 
The Business continues to ramp up capacity  
utilisation of its dedicated notebook manufacturing 
facility at Vijayawada. Equipped with state-of-the-art  
technology, the facility enables the Business to 
develop differentiated notebook formats, drive cost 
reduction and address opportunities in overseas 
markets. During the year, the Business expanded its 
exports footprint to newer geographies & segments 
and successfully onboarded large global retailers 
leveraging capabilities at the aforestated facility. 
The Classmate and Paperkraft range of notebooks 
leverage your Company’s world-class fibre line at 
Bhadrachalam - India’s first ozone treated elemental 
chlorine free facility - and embody the environmental 
capital built by your Company in its paper business. 
The Business continued to scale up the Paperkraft range 
of notebooks using Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) 
certified paper, made at your Company’s paper mill. 
With over 250 million school going students, India has 
one of the largest education systems in the world. The 
Indian Education and Stationery Products industry 
holds immense potential driven by growing literacy, 
increasing enrolment ratios, the Government’s 
continued thrust on the education sector and a 
favourable demographic profile of the country’s 
population. Your Company, with its strong brands, 
robust product portfolio, collaborative linkages with 
small & medium enterprises and superior distribution 
network is well poised to sustain its leadership 
position in the industry.
Incense Sticks (Agarbattis) and Safety Matches
The Agarbatti industry witnessed robust recovery  
after two years of pandemic induced disruptions.
Your Company’s flagship brand ‘Mangaldeep’ 
effectively leveraged market opportunities and 
continued to enhance its standing in the Incense 
Sticks category. With presence across several formats 
viz. Agarbattis, Dhoop and Sambrani, Mangaldeep 
provides discerning consumers a differentiated and 
superior product experience with a deep emotional 
connect with devotion. The Mangaldeep App, 
which has garnered over 1.6 million downloads, 
continues to play a key role in the devotional journey 
of consumers. The Business continued to drive 
brand salience through sharply focused marketing 
interventions. Proactive steps were also taken 
towards driving product mix enrichment and cost 
optimisation. Unprecedented inflationary headwinds in 
key ingredients viz. paper board, chemicals, etc. were 
mitigated by leveraging economies of scale, superior 
portfolio mix and driving sourcing efficiencies.
Based on superior consumer insights, Mangaldeep 
introduced a slew of offerings during the year. 
The brand launched ‘Mangaldeep 3 in 1’ Agarbatti 
in the Popular segment during the year. Built on the 
proposition of ‘Prarthana Ki Mehak, Prarthana Ke 
Baad Bhi’ - Mangaldeep 3 in 1 Agarbatti has three 
unique long-lasting fragrances enabling longer lasting 
auspiciousness. 
Mangaldeep also introduced ‘Dhuno Cups’ in West 
Bengal and Assam markets, which offers a modern 
and innovative solution to the age-old tradition of 
Dhunuchi in the daily puja. In the Dhoop segment, 
staying in tune with the modern consumer’s need for 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
63
ITC Limited
Your Company’s flagship brand ‘Mangaldeep’ effectively  
leveraged market opportunities and continued to enhance its standing  
in the Incense Sticks category. The Agarbatti Business has also partnered  
with around 150 visually impaired fragrance evaluators from across the country  
as a part of its ‘Mangaldeep Sixth Sense’ panel for fragrance evaluation and selection.

convenience and variety, Mangaldeep introduced 
bamboo-less ‘Dhoop Sticks’ in four modern 
fragrances– Luxury, Flora, Sandal and Rose.
The Business has also partnered with appx. 150 
visually impaired fragrance evaluators from across 
the country as a part of its ‘Mangaldeep Sixth Sense’ 
panel for fragrance evaluation and selection. 
Over the years, the Business has implemented 
several measures to enhance the competitiveness 
of the agarbatti value chain in India. These include 
import substitution and backward integration of 
sourcing raw materials and manufacturing raw battis 
using indigenous inputs. The Business has been 
a pioneer in developing domestic manufacturing 
capabilities for raw battis and is also working closely 
with the Government under the aegis of the  
‘National Bamboo Mission’ and other nodal agencies 
of state governments for cultivating bamboo 
plantations in the country.
The proactive measures implemented by your 
Company, as highlighted above, sub-serve the 
national priorities of employment generation and 
provide a source of competitive advantage to the 
Business while contributing towards enhancing 
income of bamboo farmers in the agarbatti stick and 
raw batti manufacturing value chain. 
In the Safety Matches industry, the Business 
strengthened its market leadership position 
by leveraging the brand ‘Homelites’ – built on 
differentiated positioning of stronger, longer and 
karborised sticks. The Business continues to focus 
on scaling up the share of value-added products in 
its portfolio and enhancing supply chain efficiency by 
sourcing products manufactured closer to markets. 
TRADE MARKETING & DISTRIBUTION 
Your Company’s Trade Marketing & Distribution 
(TM&D) vertical demonstrated remarkable agility and 
responsiveness in capitalising on the emergent market 
opportunities arising from normalisation of market 
conditions, premiumisation and increasing online 
purchases. Concerted actions were taken across 
all nodes of operations to ensure efficient market 
servicing and availability of your Company’s products. 
These include realigning distribution infrastructure, 
deploying innovative delivery models, forging strategic 
partnerships, leveraging digital technologies and 
adopting a focused approach to accelerate growth in 
emerging channels.
As stated in earlier years, the dynamic interplay of 
varied and evolving consumer preferences, multiplicity 
of channels including emergence of new channels, 
diverse demographic profiles & socio-economic factors 
and vast geographical landscape pose a high degree 
of complexity for distribution of FMCG products in 
India. Given the varied set of needs and challenges 
associated with each channel, TM&D continues to 
sharpen channel-specific strategies to efficiently 
service consumer demand across the country. 
Valuable insights into consumer behaviour and 
channel-specific trends gained over the years continue 
to be leveraged to deliver superior performance in 
terms of availability, visibility and freshness.
The rapid growth of Modern Trade & e-Commerce 
channels, along with the emergence of several new 
players, has necessitated deployment of differentiated 
market/outlet specific strategies to seize the emerging 
opportunities. The Modern Trade channel witnessed 
robust growth in the retail format aided by store 
expansion by accounts, both in metros and Tier 2 & 
Tier 3 cities, coupled with omni-channel presence. 
Report of the Board of Directors
64
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
Your Company’s Trade Marketing & Distribution vertical demonstrated remarkable 
agility and responsiveness in capitalising on the emergent market opportunities.  
TM&D continues to leverage cutting-edge digital technologies to drive productivity, 
improve market servicing, draw actionable insights for sharp-focused interventions, 
augment sales force capability and deepen connect with retailers.

Growth in the channel continues to be driven by 
deploying a format-based assortment approach 
catering to the needs of a diverse set of shoppers 
with category specific sell-out strategies. Agile supply 
chain initiatives including collaborations with supply 
chain partners led to enhanced operational and 
execution efficiencies. 
Significant increase in internet penetration led by 
smartphones, growing adoption of digital payments, 
attractive loyalty programmes, wide assortment 
of products and faster deliveries continue to drive 
the rising salience of e-Commerce channel. Your 
Company’s collaborations with leading e-Commerce 
platforms on all aspects of operations viz. category 
development, marketing, supply chain and customer 
acquisition has enabled it to significantly scale 
up sales in this channel. This was augmented 
by development of exclusive and relevant pack 
assortments, driving ‘Digital First’ brands and enabling 
platform discoverability through jointly curated 
campaigns. Joint Business Plans, built and executed 
in close co-ordination with e-Commerce platforms, 
coupled with account specific strategies further 
consolidated the market standing of your Company in 
this channel. Sales through the e-Commerce channel 
has grown rapidly in recent years and stood at appx. 
5x of FY 2019-20 levels; the channel accounts for 
over 10% of your Company’s Branded Packaged 
Foods and Personal Care Products sales. 
Your Company’s multi-channel distribution network, 
which facilitates availability of its products in nearly 
seven million retail outlets of which more than one-third 
are serviced directly, was further strengthened during 
the year with the addition of new markets and outlets 
to its direct servicing base. Market coverage was 
stepped up to appx. 2x of pre-pandemic levels. 
During the year, urban markets continued to witness 
channel shift with the growth of Modern Trade and 
e-Commerce. Automation, data-led insighting and 
machine-learning enabled solutions have been 
increasingly leveraged to drive field-force productivity 
and performance across urban markets. Customised 
servicing based on outlet potential and retail 
engagement programmes have been deployed to 
stimulate demand for your Company’s products with 
enhanced focus on premium grocery outlets.
In rural markets, your Company continued to deploy 
market-specific interventions to enhance direct 
coverage on the basis of socio-economic indicators 
and market potential. This has been supported 
through a hub and spoke distribution model with 
the continued expansion of rural stockists network 
to 1.2x over previous year and collaborations with 
rural-focused eB2B players. Your Company has also 
leveraged its deep connect with rural entrepreneurs 
in key geographies to build local connect and carry 
out extensive consumer engagement activities. These 
initiatives have substantially enhanced distribution 
reach of your Company’s range of products in rural 
markets leading to sales growth ahead of industry.
The Food Service and Institutional channels have 
also witnessed robust growth during the year 
leveraging existing partnerships and enhancement of 
product range. Further, new routes-to-market were 
unlocked through several strategic partnerships to 
cater to specialised segments, including ‘on-the-go’ 
consumption, direct marketing, airports & airlines 
and QSRs. Your Company continues to scale up its 
presence in the rapidly growing emerging channels 
and has further expanded availability of its products 
with new trade partners on Quick Commerce and 
Social Commerce platforms.
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
65
ITC Limited
Your Company’s multi-channel distribution network, which facilitates availability of  
its products in nearly seven million retail outlets of which more than one-third are 
serviced directly, was further strengthened during the year. Market coverage  
was stepped up to appx. 2x of pre-pandemic levels.

During the year, TM&D continued to focus on 
enhancing availability in markets proximal to its 
ICMLs through increased awareness levels, product 
trial generations, expansion of distribution reach and 
consumer promotions.
TM&D continues to leverage cutting-edge digital 
technologies to drive productivity, improve market 
servicing, draw actionable insights for sharp-focused 
interventions, augment sales force capability 
and deepen connect with retailers. Technology 
enablement in the form of customised mobility and 
routing solutions, machine learning algorithms, data 
science models, data analytics comprising insightful 
visualisation tools and predictive analysis is being 
increasingly leveraged to enable speedy and accurate 
data capture, enable real-time informed decisions and 
aid in optimisation of trade inputs to enhance sales. 
Self-service analytics tools are also being increasingly 
used to analyse data and present insights which are 
digitally integrated into business decisions, resulting in 
intelligent digitalisation of processes.
The digitally powered eB2B platform of your Company, 
UNNATI, has been rapidly scaled up during the 
year covering nearly 5.4 lakh outlets. UNNATI 
facilitates sharp and direct engagement with retailers, 
superior analytics, personalised recommendations 
of hyperlocal baskets based on consumer purchase 
insights, and deeper brand engagement.
In line with your Company’s credo of ‘Nation First: 
Sab Saath Badhein’, TM&D has partnered with Open 
Network for Digital Commerce (ONDC) to help small 
retailers ride the digitalisation wave. As a part of this 
industry-first initiative, your Company is assisting 
traditional retailers to on-board the ONDC network 
and helping them have an omni-channel presence. 
This intervention would enable such retailers to 
enhance their competitiveness in the growing digital 
marketplace as also enable them to effectively 
address evolving consumer buying behaviour.
‘ITC e-Store’, your Company’s exclusive D2C 
platform, is now operational in 24,000+ pin-codes and 
continues to receive excellent consumer response. 
ITC e-Store has also partnered with ONDC in the 
journey of unlocking newer consumer touchpoints 
and addressing buyer preferences in the growing 
e-Commerce arena. Powered by state-of-the-art 
digital technology and robust fulfilment infrastructure, 
the platform offers consumers on-demand access to a 
wide range of your Company’s FMCG products across 
45+ categories and over 900 products under one roof. 
The scale and diversity of your Company’s distribution 
network continues to be a critical lever to enhance 
market presence, gain valuable insights into consumer 
& trade behaviour and provide speed and scale of 
execution for launches across geographies. In order to 
effectively leverage new routes-to-markets and meet 
the assortment needs of emerging channels, your 
Company executed over 90 new product launches 
across target markets besides extending distribution 
reach of several existing products in the portfolio.
Several interventions were undertaken by TM&D 
during the year to further improve operational 
effectiveness & productivity and create structural 
competitive advantage. These include supply chain 
& network optimisation, smart buying including 
efficient freight procurement and delayering of 
operations through direct shipments to customers. 
During the year, your Company implemented an 
integrated planning and supply chain tool, which 
is powered by AI/ML technology for inventory 
optimisation and productivity enhancement. This 
intervention is expected to enhance supply chain 
Report of the Board of Directors
66
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
‘ITC e-Store’, your Company’s exclusive D2C platform, is now operational  
in 24,000+ pin-codes and continues to receive excellent consumer response. 
Powered by state-of-the-art digital technology and robust fulfilment infrastructure, 
the platform offers consumers on-demand access to a wide range of your Company’s 
FMCG products across 45+ categories and over 900 products under one roof.

agility and efficiency, while also further improving 
market servicing. An IoT based solution has also 
been implemented which monitors stock movements 
on a real time basis resulting in improved vehicle 
turnaround time and enhanced customer service 
through data analytics. 
TM&D’s distribution highway is a source of sustainable 
competitive advantage for your Company’s FMCG 
Businesses and is well-positioned to support the rapid 
scale up of operations in the ensuing years leveraging 
its best-in-class systems and processes, an agile and 
responsive supply chain, and a synergistic relationship 
with its channel partners.
HOTELS
The global Travel & Tourism industry, which had 
been severely impacted in the last two years due 
to the pandemic, witnessed strong rebound in the 
current year. As per estimates of the World Travel and 
Tourism Council (WTTC), the Travel & Tourism sector 
is expected to contribute US$ 8.6 trillion to the global 
economy in 2022 (about 94% of pre-pandemic levels). 
As per estimates of the WTTC, the sector, which had 
suffered 62 million job losses in 2020, has almost 
recovered to pre-pandemic levels, with an estimated 
40 million jobs having been added in 2022 on top of 
the 18 million jobs which were added in 2021. 
The Travel & Tourism sector plays a vital role in the 
Indian economy and holds immense potential for 
growth. The extensive tourism value chain spanning 
hotels, travel agents, airlines, tour operators, 
restaurants, tourist transporters and guides, etc. 
results in a huge economic multiplier impact, ranking 
it amongst the highest across industries on this count. 
The sector’s contribution to the Indian economy 
remains significant and is estimated at appx. 7% of 
GDP. While the global passenger traffic has recovered 
to 68.5% of 2019 volumes in 2022, domestic air travel 
in India has recovered at a faster pace to over 85% 
of 2019 levels. However, foreign tourist arrivals in 
India, while improving over the previous year, remains 
significantly below pre-pandemic levels.
During the year, your Company’s Hotels Business 
delivered competitively superior performance,  
on the back of enriched guest experiences, 
operational excellence and new growth opportunities. 
The Business continued to focus on its strategy 
of offering a host of curated propositions across 
accommodation, dining and banqueting to augment 
revenues across properties. This included introduction 
of special packages offering distinct value propositions 
and flexibility, targeting short getaways/staycations, 
revamped packages for the MICE & wedding 
segments and extension of exclusive privileges to 
members of the Club ITC Loyalty programme. 
In the backdrop of a buoyant operating environment, 
Segment Revenue for the year doubled to ` 2585.03 
crores while Segment EBITDA stood at ` 831.62 
crores, as against ` 78.03 crores in the previous year. 
Segment PBIT for the year stood at ` 541.90 crores 
representing a positive swing of ` 724.99 crores over 
the previous year. 
Your Company’s Hotels Business continues to 
leverage its ‘asset-right’ strategy to be amongst 
the fastest growing hospitality chains in the country 
with over 120 properties and 11,500 rooms under 
distinguished and distinctive brands – ‘ITC Hotels’ in 
the Luxury segment, ‘Welcomhotel’ in the Premium 
segment, ‘Fortune’ in the Mid-market to Upscale 
segment and ‘WelcomHeritage’ in the Leisure & 
Heritage segment.
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
67
ITC Limited
Your Company’s Hotels Business continues to leverage its ‘asset-right’ strategy 
to be amongst the fastest growing hospitality chains in the country with over  
120 properties and 11,500 rooms under distinguished and distinctive brands –  
‘ITC Hotels’ in the Luxury segment, ‘Welcomhotel’ in the Premium segment, 
‘Fortune’ in the Mid-market to Upscale segment and ‘WelcomHeritage’  
in the Leisure & Heritage segment.

Further expanding its footprint, the Business had 
launched two new brands in the previous year - 
‘Mementos’ in the Luxury Lifestyle segment and ‘Storii’ 
in the Premium segment, targeting new age travellers 
looking for varied experiences.
During the year, 12 new properties were added to the 
Group portfolio, including:
–	 ITC Narmada at Ahmedabad (Gujarat’s first LEED 
Platinum rated hotel), offering 291 guest rooms 
and suites, which draws inspiration from the river 
Narmada along with the iconic architecture, vibrant 
culture and grandeur of Gujarat. 
–	 Ekaaya Udaipur (managed property), located 
amidst the Aravali hills, with 117 suites under 
‘Mementos by ITC Hotels’.
–	 Storii Shanti Morada at Goa (managed property), 
offering 20 well-appointed guest rooms, 
representing a varied confluence of Portuguese 
and Indian culture.
–	 Storii Amoha Retreat at Dharamshala (managed 
property), offering 37 guest rooms and suites; built 
using sustainable and locally sourced materials.
–	 Welcomhotel Jim Corbett in Uttarakhand (64-key 
managed property), offering a premium experience 
nestled in close proximity to the picturesque Jim 
Corbett National Park. 
–	 Welcomhotel Ahmedabad (129-key managed 
property), a premium boutique property offering 
signature dining experience and expansive 
banqueting.
All of these properties have received excellent 
response from guests within a short span of time. 
The Welcomhotel brand now consists of 24 hotels and 
over 2,600 keys. With a strong pipeline of properties 
to be onboarded under the management contract 
route, the brand is well positioned to scale up  
rapidly in line with the ‘asset-right’ growth strategy  
of the Business.
The ‘Fortune’ brand continues to maintain its  
pre-eminent position in the Mid-market to Upscale 
segment, with a positioning of ‘First class, full service 
hotels – an affordable alternative’, comprising 
43 operating properties and over 3,300 rooms. 
The ‘WelcomHeritage’ brand continues to create  
best-in-class authentic experiences with an operational 
inventory of 36 hotels comprising over 950 rooms. 
With a strong pipeline of properties under the 
management contract route, the Business’s distinctive 
brands are well poised for rapid scale up, in line with 
its ‘asset-right’ growth strategy.
‘Responsible Luxury’ continues to guide business 
best practices in line with the ‘Triple Bottom Line’ 
philosophy of your Company. The Business has the 
highest number of hotels in the world to have been 
awarded the LEED Platinum Certification by USGBC, 
with 22 of its hotels achieving this feat. Furthering your 
Company’s Responsible Luxury ethos, 12 of its iconic 
hotels have received LEED Zero Carbon Certification, 
the first in the world to have received the same.  
ITC Mughal became the first hotel globally to be 
awarded the LEED Zero Water Certification by the 
USGBC, followed by ITC Sonar, which is the second 
hotel to be awarded the certification globally.
Going forward, the Business has plans to further 
enhance the renewable energy portfolio, increase 
the number of LEED Zero Carbon Certifications, and 
reduce carbon emission levels.
ITC Hotels was recognised as the best Luxury Hotel 
Chain for the 4th consecutive year at ‘Travel + Leisure 
India’s Best Awards 2022’. In the premium segment, 
Report of the Board of Directors
68
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
Your Company’s Hotels Business, with its ethos of ‘Responsible Luxury’ 
scaled new heights with 12 of its iconic hotels being the first in the world 
to receive the LEED Zero Carbon Certification; while 2 hotels became 
the first in the world to be awarded the LEED Zero Water Certification.

the Welcomhotel brand continues to strengthen 
its equity with its characteristic positioning of 
‘Enriching Experiences’.
Leveraging its expertise and experience in the domain 
of sleep, the Business had recently launched its 
signature ‘Sleeep’ Boutiques across the country, 
offering a wide range of premium home bedding 
products with both online and offline retail options. 
These boutiques, present across seven ITC Hotels, 
have received encouraging response and plans are 
on the anvil to scale up operations going forward. 
The world-class ambience of your Company’s luxury 
hotels continues to be leveraged for gourmet luxury 
chocolates under the Fabelle brand with exclusive 
boutiques across nine ITC Hotels and kiosks at 
four Welcomhotels. 
Digital investments continue to be leveraged 
towards enhancing guest experience, facilitating 
guest acquisition, augmenting revenue generation 
and driving operational efficiency. During the year, 
the Business continued to promote its full stack 
ITC Hotels App for Food Delivery, Room & Table 
Reservations, Loyalty Benefits, Exclusive Offers and 
more. The App has also been enhanced with room 
automation and entertainment control module, which 
has been rolled out in select hotels. 
ITC Hotels is recognised for its award-winning culinary 
excellence, with illustrious brands, dishes and concepts 
revolving around indigenous ingredients and signature 
dining experiences. From bringing alive local flavours, 
inspired by the ever-changing seasons, cultures 
and age-old traditions, the Business has been at the 
forefront of presenting gastronomical delights to food 
connoisseurs for decades. Sourcing local ingredients 
and using time-honoured techniques, the Business 
continues to remain ahead of peers in creating 
delectable dishes from humble ingredients and ensuring 
every meal is an aromatic celebration par excellence.
The Business continues to enhance its  
award-winning repertoire of culinary brands.  
In alignment with the Government’s initiative of 
promoting millets and in keeping with its ethos of 
producing sustainable cuisine, the Business has 
also created a range of millet-based gourmet cuisine 
across its signature restaurants. Further, it is also 
promoting easy-to-try recipes with millets to help 
encourage individuals experiment with the taste and 
texture of millets. 
Over the years, your Company has expanded its 
footprint in the Luxury and Upper Upscale segments 
of the Indian hospitality industry. Your Company’s 
‘asset-right’ strategy envisages a substantial part of 
incremental room additions, going forward, to accrue 
through management contracts. The Business is 
witnessing growing interest amongst property owners 
to partner with its iconic brands resulting in healthy 
generation of leads and pipeline of management 
contracts. The Business is confident of rapidly scaling 
up revenues through this route going forward. 
As reported earlier, your Company remains committed 
to implement its ‘asset-right’ strategy, focus on 
sweating existing assets, create additional revenue 
streams and pursue alternate structures in view of the 
strong industry recovery witnessed during the year 
towards engendering the next horizon of growth as 
also enhancing value creation.
With its highest standards of hygiene and safety, 
portfolio of world-class properties, iconic cuisine 
brands and best-in-class service levels anchored on 
the ethos of ‘Responsible Luxury’, your Company is 
well placed to sustain its pre-eminent position in the 
Indian hospitality industry. 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
69
ITC Limited
ITC Hotels is recognised for its award-winning culinary excellence,  
with illustrious brands, dishes and concepts revolving around indigenous  
ingredients and signature dining experiences. The Hotels Business has also  
created a range of millet-based gourmet cuisine across its signature restaurants.

PAPERBOARDS, PAPER AND PACKAGING
Paperboards & Specialty Papers
The demand for Paper & Paperboards grew at about 
6-7% in FY 2022-23 driven by robust growth across 
most end-user segments. Sequential moderation was 
witnessed during the second half of the year, primarily 
due to inventory pipeline adjustments by export 
customers and relatively lower offtake by domestic 
customers towards the end of the year. Cost of key 
inputs remained elevated with global pulp prices 
witnessing unprecedented highs during the first half of 
the year on account of global supply chain disruptions, 
geopolitical tensions, adverse weather events, higher 
power and chemical costs. However, pulp prices 
moderated in the second half of the year due to 
subdued Chinese demand, recessionary conditions in 
Europe and progressive normalisation in supply chain 
operations. Chemical prices, which were also at record 
highs, moderated towards the end of the financial year, 
while remaining elevated over pre-pandemic levels. 
Coal supplies were adversely impacted by supply 
chain disruptions and prioritisation of domestic supplies 
to thermal power plants. The Indian Rupee depreciated 
against the US Dollar during the year which further 
impacted cost of imports. 
Amidst heightened inflationary pressures, the 
Business delivered robust performance during the 
year leveraging its integrated business model and 
strong end-user engagements. Structural interventions 
across the value chain including, inter alia, 
developing high yielding clones, augmenting value 
added paperboard & in-house pulp manufacturing 
capacity, product & process innovation, digital 
interventions including Industry 4.0 and creating 
superior distribution infrastructure continue to provide 
the Business sustainable competitive advantages. 
The Business fortified its clear leadership in the  
Value Added Paperboard (VAP) segment through 
innovation focused on developing customised 
solutions for end-use industries and maintaining 
best-in-class customer service levels. The Business 
is also the industry leader in the eco-labelled 
products segment as well as the premium recycled 
paperboards space.
The Business continues to ramp up its sustainable 
products portfolio and achieved appx. two-fold 
increase in revenue over the previous year. 
The ‘Filo’ series of sustainable solutions viz. ‘FiloBev’ 
(for cups), ‘FiloServe’ (for QSR, bakeries, food retail) &  
‘FiloPack’ (packaging for sweets and deep freeze 
applications), continued to witness strong traction 
in both domestic and international markets. The 
‘Omega’ series viz. ‘OmegaBev’ and ‘OmegaBev 
Vio’, certified compostable by Central Institute of 
Petrochemicals Engineering & Technology (CIPET) 
and also registered with the Central Pollution Control 
Board (CPCB), continued to increase its franchise 
with large eco-conscious brands. The Business is 
stepping up investments in this fast-evolving space 
which holds immense growth potential, supported 
by the R&D capabilities of your Company’s Life 
Sciences & Technology Centre and through external 
collaborations with global specialists. 
During the year, your Company set up a wholly owned 
subsidiary, ITC Fibre Innovations Limited, to foray into 
the fast-growing premium Moulded Fibre Products 
(MFP) space. Towards this end, construction of a  
state-of-the-art MFP manufacturing facility in 
Badiyakhedi, Madhya Pradesh, is underway. 
Customers are increasingly seeking solutions that 
are bio-degradable, substitute single use plastic 
and meet stakeholder and regulatory expectations 
across industries including food serving and 
Report of the Board of Directors
70
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
The Paperboards & Specialty Papers Business fortified its clear leadership in  
the Value Added Paperboard (VAP) segment through innovation focused on  
developing customised solutions for end-use industries and maintaining  
best-in-class customer service levels. The Business is also  
the industry leader in the eco-labelled products segment  
as well as the premium recycled paperboards space.

delivery, pharmaceutical, beauty and electronics. 
The raw materials for such products are sourced 
from environment-friendly, renewable, natural fibres 
such as wood, bamboo etc. The MFP business 
will leverage your Company’s expertise in fibre 
value chain, manufacturing excellence and strong 
sustainability credentials to rapidly scale up business 
going forward.
During the year, the Business delivered robust 
performance in the Specialty Papers segment. 
Market standing continues to be driven by product 
mix enrichment and diversification of the customer 
base. The domestic industry continues to remain 
under pressure on account of cheap imports from 
China. Anti-dumping duty on Décor paper continues 
to provide a level playing field for domestic industry, 
further enhance ‘Make in India’ opportunities & foster 
domestic value chains and enable import substitution. 
A strong distribution network, efficient supply chain 
and customised product portfolio leveraging  
cutting-edge innovation capabilities based on superior 
customer insights, provide structural competitive 
advantages to the Business to further consolidate its 
market standing in the fast growing Décor segment.
The Business continues to make structural 
interventions to reduce dependence on imported pulp, 
enabling substantial reduction in operating costs. 
Significant increase in in-house pulp production was 
achieved through strategic interventions, Industry 4.0 
initiatives and improved wood mix. Capacity utilisation 
of the chemical pulp mill at the Bhadrachalam unit 
touched a record high during the year. 
The Business has been practising the principles 
of Total Productive Maintenance (TPM), Lean and 
Six Sigma for over a decade and continues to reap 
substantial benefits through its Business Excellence 
initiatives. In recent years, the Business has embarked 
upon a comprehensive Digital Transformation 
Programme across the vectors of manufacturing, 
supply chain and support services to achieve operational 
excellence and drive improvement in profitability.
Your Company is a pioneer in the adoption of Industry 
4.0 in the Indian Paper & Paperboard industry. Digital 
and emergent technologies continue to be leveraged 
towards enhancing operational efficiency, reducing 
wastages, enabling cost optimisation and improving 
safety across the value chain. The multi-dimensional 
digital interventions encompass Industrial IoT for 
Smart Operations, Integrated Data Platform, AI/ML  
algorithms for optimisation in the manufacturing 
process, AI/ML based image analytics and IoT based 
crop monitoring & advisory, computer vision-based 
solutions to improve workforce safety. The Business 
also embarked on collaborating with leading online 
training platforms to upskill managers across business 
functions in new age digital tools and technologies. 
The Business continues to collaborate with partners 
from the start-up ecosystem, as well as established 
solution providers, in building scalable solutions that 
are custom-fit to business requirements. Over 100 use 
cases have already been developed and implemented 
across multiple spheres of the Business, aiding in 
margin expansion.
Your Company continues to procure its wood 
requirements from sustainable sources. Research 
on clonal development has resulted in introduction 
of high-yielding and disease-resistant clones that are 
adaptable to a wide variety of agro-climatic conditions 
which aid in increasing farmer income whilst securing 
greater consistency in earnings. In this context, your 
Company’s Life Sciences & Technology Centre 
is engaged in developing higher yielding second 
generation clones with enhanced pest and disease 
resistant attributes.
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
71
ITC Limited
Your Company is a pioneer in the adoption of Industry 4.0  
in the Indian Paper & Paperboard industry. Digital and emergent technologies  
continue to be leveraged towards enhancing operational efficiency, reducing wastages, 
enabling cost optimisation and improving safety across the value chain.

Your Company has the distinction of being the first 
in India to have obtained the Forest Stewardship 
Council-Forest Management (FSC®-FM) certification, 
which confirms compliance with the highest 
international benchmarks of plantation management 
across the dimensions of environmental responsibility, 
social benefit and economic viability. Till date, your 
Company has received FSC®-FM certification for 
close to 1.5 lakh acres of plantations involving over 
25000 farmers. During the year, nearly 4.3 lakh tonnes 
of FSC®-certified wood was procured from these 
certified plantations. Your Company sustained its 
position as the leading supplier of FSC®-certified 
paper and paperboards in India.
Initiatives such as bund plantation and scaling up 
plantations in new catchment areas in Odisha and 
Chhattisgarh have enabled procurement of more than 
10,000 MT of wood from these areas, with further 
potential for increasing cost-effective access to fibre in 
the future.
All manufacturing units of the Business continue to 
recycle nearly 100% of the solid waste generated 
during operations by converting the same into lime, 
fly ash bricks, cement, grey boards, egg trays etc. 
In addition, the Business recycled around 1.1 lakh 
tonnes of waste paper during the year, thereby 
sustaining your Company’s positive solid waste 
recycling footprint.
The manufacturing facilities at Bhadrachalam, Kovai, 
Tribeni and Bollaram continue to receive industry 
recognition for their green credentials and safety 
standards in line with your Company’s focus on 
sustainable business practices. The Bhadrachalam 
unit is the first pulp & paper plant and the second in 
the country overall, to be rated ‘GreenCo Platinum+’  
by CII, as part of the Green Company rating system. 
The Kovai unit has also been rated GreenCo 
Platinum+ by CII. The unit is the first site in India 
and the first paper mill in the world to achieve 
the highest platinum rating under the ‘Alliance for 
Water Stewardship Standards’. Bhadrachalam and 
Kovai mills won awards for Excellence in Energy 
Management at the ‘23rd National Awards’ for 
‘Excellence in Energy Management’ in the  
Pulp & Paper sector. The Bhadrachalam unit was 
rated as the Winner in ‘Within the Fence’ category 
under CII-National awards for Water management.
The Business continues to strengthen its safety 
management processes, adopt globally recognised 
best practices and ensure that facilities are designed, 
constructed, operated and maintained in an inherently 
safe manner. Your Company continues to deploy 
various measures viz. use of Data Analytics Tools to 
identify risk prone areas for proactive mitigation of 
incidents, video analytics etc.
In line with the objective of enhancing the share of 
renewable energy in its operations, the Business has 
implemented several initiatives including investments 
in a green boiler, high pressure & efficiency circulating 
fluidised bed boiler, solar & wind energy and 
increased usage of bio-fuel. With these initiatives, 
renewable sources presently account for appx. 44% 
of total energy consumed at the four manufacturing 
units.
Augmentation of the Bleached Chemical Thermo 
Mechanical pulp production facility has been 
completed during the year. The project for augmenting 
chemical pulp capacity is also nearing completion. 
These initiatives will further enhance substitution of 
imported pulp, enhance support to Indian farmers 
and enable reduction in operating costs. The recently 
Report of the Board of Directors
72
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
The recently commissioned state-of-the-art and future-ready  
High-Pressure Recovery Boiler at the Bhadrachalam mill is progressively  
enhancing energy efficiency and reducing the carbon footprint of the unit’s 
operations by significantly lowering coal consumption by appx. 25%.

commissioned state-of-the-art and future-ready High-
Pressure Recovery Boiler at the Bhadrachalam mill 
is progressively enhancing energy efficiency and 
reducing the carbon footprint of the unit’s operations 
by significantly lowering coal consumption by 
appx. 25%. These investments are a testament to 
your Company’s commitment towards embedding 
sustainability in its operations and supporting the 
‘Make in India’ initiative.
Going forward, paperboards demand is expected 
to be driven by end-user segments such as 
pharmaceuticals, apparels, FMCG, consumer 
durables and e-Commerce. Writing & Printing paper 
demand is also expected to remain firm on the back of 
demand from the publishing and notebooks industries 
driven by the Government’s thrust on primary and 
secondary education. 
The integrated nature of your Company’s business 
model - comprising access to high-quality, cost 
competitive and renewable fibre supply chain,  
in-house pulp manufacturing capability, imported  
pulp substitution, world-class product quality,  
state-of-the-art manufacturing facilities, increasing 
usage of data analytics and Industry 4.0 technologies 
along with robust forward linkages with the  
Education and Stationery Products Business and  
the Packaging and Printing Business - is a key  
source of competitive advantage for your Company’s 
Paperboards & Specialty Papers Business. Your 
Company is confident of further consolidating 
its leadership position in the Indian Paper and 
Paperboards industry leveraging recent investments 
in innovation platforms anchored on the development 
of sustainable products and cutting-edge digital 
technologies to set new benchmarks in customer 
satisfaction, operational excellence and sustainability. 
Packaging and Printing
Your Company’s Packaging and Printing Business 
is a leading provider of superior value-added 
packaging solutions leveraging its comprehensive 
capability-set spanning multiple technology platforms 
coupled with in-house cylinder making and blown 
film manufacturing lines. The Business caters to the 
packaging requirements of leading players across 
several industry segments viz. Food & Beverage, 
Personal Care, Home Care, Footwear, Consumer 
Electronics, QSR, Pharma, Liquor and Tobacco. It 
also provides strategic support to your Company’s 
FMCG and Cigarettes Businesses by facilitating 
faster turnaround for new launches, providing 
innovative packaging solutions, facilitating packaging 
changes, ensuring security of supplies and delivering 
benchmarked international quality at competitive cost. 
The year under review remained challenging for 
the Business due to unprecedented inflation in 
commodity prices. Notwithstanding the challenging 
operating environment, the Business remained 
resilient and registered robust growth in domestic and 
exports businesses.
Amidst heightened competitive intensity and sluggish 
economic conditions, the Business has been 
aggressively pursuing new business development 
opportunities across segments and has acquired 
several key accounts during the year.
The Business continues to craft innovative packaging 
solutions leveraging its deep understanding of end-user 
needs and the capabilities of your Company’s Life 
Sciences and Technology Centre. Recognising the 
need for sustainable packaging and the emerging 
demand for plastic substitutes, the Business continues 
to leverage its flagship ‘InnovPack’ campaign and 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
73
ITC Limited
Your Company’s Packaging and Printing Business is a leading  
provider of superior value-added packaging solutions leveraging  
its comprehensive capability-set spanning multiple technology platforms  
coupled with in-house cylinder making and blown film manufacturing lines.

is focusing on end-use segments with potential for 
rapid adoption of sustainable packaging and plastic 
substitution solutions. Along with a steady pipeline 
of pioneering solutions anchored on molecular 
science research such as ‘Bioseal’ (compostable 
packaging solution), ‘Oxyblock’ (recyclable coating 
solution to enhance barrier properties in packaging) 
and ‘Germ free coating’ (solution for microbial 
free packaging surface addressing the consumer 
consciousness towards hygiene and safety), the 
Business has also pioneered several innovative 
solutions towards ‘Reducing, Reusing and Recycling’ 
of plastic substrates which are under various stages 
of commercialisation. Going forward, the Business will 
continue to invest resources to develop sustainable 
packaging solutions.
The Business continues to be acknowledged as a 
‘first choice packaging partner’ by several reputed 
FMCG companies in the country for providing superior 
and cost-effective packaging solutions across areas 
such as sustainable packaging, superior structural 
design and enhanced security features. The Business 
continues to deploy several operational excellence 
tools along with focused interventions in the  
areas of efficiency improvement, waste reduction,  
quality improvement and employee skill building.  
The Business also continues to be amongst the top 
ranked global packaging companies on productivity 
parameters as per the latest International Packaging 
Group and International Flexibles Packaging Network 
rankings. During the year, the Business received 
global recognition and was adjudged winner at the 
prestigious WorldStar Global Packaging Awards 
(two awards for pack premiumisation and three for 
sustainability) and also won nearly 50 national level 
awards such as the IndiaStar awards, Printweek 
awards, IFCA Star awards and SIES SOP  
Star awards for its excellence in packaging under 
various categories including sustainability and  
eco-friendly packaging. 
To cater to its growing customer base in Western 
region and to further improve customer service 
levels, the Business has commissioned a greenfield 
manufacturing plant in Nadiad, Gujarat with  
state-of-the-art equipment for the Cartons packaging 
platform. Capacity utilisation at the facility is expected 
to be progressively scaled up going forward.
All four units of the Business are certified as per the 
Integrated Management System, consisting of ISO 
9001:2015, ISO 14001:2015 and ISO 45001:2018. 
The cartons packaging lines in both the Tiruvottiyur 
and Haridwar units received the ‘Grade A’ and the 
Nadiad unit received ‘Grade AA’ Brand Reputation 
Compliance Global Standards (BRCGS) certification, 
for global standards in packaging and packaging 
materials - a key enabler for supplies to the packaged 
foods industry. The Tiruvottiyur unit received the Gold 
Award for Excellence in EHS from CII. 
The Packaging and Printing Business of your 
Company has established itself as a one-stop 
packaging solutions provider, offering a wide range 
of innovative products to cater to the evolving 
requirements of customers across industries. With 
world-class technology across a diverse range of 
packaging platforms, innovative sustainable packaging 
solutions, best-in-class quality management systems, 
focused investments in skill development and a 
distributed manufacturing footprint, the Business is 
well positioned to grow its marquee customer base 
while continuing to service the requirements of your 
Company’s FMCG Businesses.
Report of the Board of Directors
74
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
Recognising the need for sustainable packaging and the emerging demand for plastic 
substitutes, the Business continues to leverage its flagship ‘InnovPack’ campaign.  
Along with a steady pipeline of pioneering solutions anchored on molecular science  
research such as ‘Bioseal’, ‘Oxyblock’ and ‘Germ free coating’, the Business has also 
pioneered several innovative solutions towards ‘Reducing, Reusing and Recycling’ of 
plastic substrates which are under various stages of commercialisation.

AGRI BUSINESS
Leaf Tobacco 
Flue Cured Virginia (FCV) tobacco production in 
2022 largely remained at similar levels as that of 
the previous year with weather conditions adversely 
impacting crop output in certain origins. The trend of 
global customers increasing the share of sourcing 
requirement from suppliers with higher order 
sustainability credentials gained further momentum 
during the year. This, coupled with lower FCV supplies 
from major supply origins such as Brazil provided  
an opportunity to enhance share in exports which was 
effectively leveraged by your Company to register 
robust growth in exports.
The Business continued to leverage its crop 
development expertise, superior product quality, 
world-class processing facilities and strong 
sustainability credentials to strengthen its position  
as a reliable supply chain partner for global 
customers. Deeper farmer & customer engagement, 
operational agility and supply chain efficiency  
enabled the Business to deliver enhanced value  
to existing customers and consolidate its  
pre-eminent position as the largest Indian exporter of 
unmanufactured tobacco.
The Business continues to make focused investments 
across the tobacco value chain anchored on the key 
vectors of Quality, Consistency, Compliance and 
Sustainability. Crop and region-specific agronomic 
practices continue to be deployed to cater to the 
emerging preferences of customers. 
The Business continues to set benchmarks in leaf 
threshing operations through focused initiatives 
and innovative technological & digital solutions. 
Investments continue to be made in your Company’s 
Green Leaf Threshing plants (GLT) at Anaparti, 
Chirala and Mysuru towards delivering world-class 
quality and upgrading processing technology. The 
energy needs of all three GLTs are substantially met 
from renewable sources in line with your Company’s 
philosophy of adopting a low-carbon growth path.
The Business remains committed to highest standards 
of EHS (Environment, Health, Safety) & Quality and 
continues to win recognition in these areas. During 
the year, the Business received an award for ‘Most 
Innovative Best Practices’ from CII and Platinum 
award for ‘Systematic and Sustainable Energy 
Performance’ from Society of Energy Engineers 
and Managers (SEEM). In addition, the Business 
received various awards at events organised 
by the Quality Circle Forum of India and CII for 
operational excellence.
Strategic cost management across the value chain 
continues to be a key focus area for the Business. 
The AI/ML powered real-time buying platform 
continues to be scaled up to facilitate efficient leaf 
tobacco buying across auction platforms. Several 
initiatives implemented in recent years have led 
to improved operating efficiencies in processing 
facilities and the supply chain.
Synergistic R&D initiatives with focus on varietal 
development, climate smart farming techniques 
and usage of water efficient technologies are being 
scaled up towards enhancing productivity & product 
quality, reducing cultivation costs and strengthening 
resilience of the value chain. The Business enabled 
farmers to successfully implement integrated 
energy management initiatives spanning energy 
conservation, increasing alternative fuel usage and 
energy plantations, towards achieving fuel  
self-sufficiency in the curing process of FCV.  
In addition to these initiatives, your Company is  
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
75
ITC Limited
The Leaf Tobacco Business consolidated its pre-eminent position as the  
largest Indian exporter of unmanufactured tobacco. The Business continued to 
leverage its crop development expertise, superior product quality, world-class  
processing facilities and strong sustainability credentials to strengthen  
its position as a reliable supply chain partner for global customers.

taking up integrated watershed management 
programmes to ensure availability of water for 
irrigation during critical phases of the crop cycle. 
A punitive and discriminatory taxation and regulatory 
regime on cigarettes, apart from providing a fillip 
to illicit trade and severely impacting the domestic 
legal cigarette industry, has also adversely impacted 
demand for the leaf tobacco crop grown in India 
over the years leading, inter alia, to severe stress 
on farmer earnings. Illicit cigarettes also continue to 
impact leaf tobacco trade as these products do not 
use Indian tobacco. Accordingly, a more balanced 
regulatory and taxation regime that cognises for the 
unique tobacco consumption pattern prevalent in 
India and the economic realities of the country is the 
need of the hour to support the Indian tobacco farmer 
and the 46 million livelihoods dependent on tobacco. 
Lower export incentives in India and high import 
duty levied in several markets, including the USA 
and Europe, have weighed on the competitiveness 
of Indian leaf tobacco exports. Restoring export 
incentives to earlier levels and necessary policy 
support to alleviate trade barriers would go a 
long way in enhancing the competitiveness of 
unmanufactured tobacco exports from India and 
contribute to increasing farmer earnings. Your 
Company continues to engage with policy makers 
on these matters. The recent stability in the taxation 
and regulatory regime on cigarettes has enabled 
engendering domestic demand for Indian tobaccos, 
while also enhancing farmer incomes.
Going forward, the Business will continue to provide 
strategic sourcing support to your Company’s 
Cigarettes Business and consolidate its leadership 
position as a major exporter of quality Indian tobacco 
thereby catalysing the multiplier impact of increased 
farmer incomes on the rural economy. With its strong 
R&D capability, sustainability leadership, unique crop 
development & extension expertise, state-of-the-art  
processing facilities and deep understanding of 
customer & farmer needs, your Company is well 
positioned to meet the current and emerging 
requirements of global customers and sustain its 
position as a world-class leaf tobacco organisation.
Other Agri Commodities
The operating environment was rendered challenging 
during the year against the backdrop of severe 
inflationary headwinds and concerns of food security 
that emerged due to geopolitical tensions and erratic 
weather patterns. 
Notwithstanding the challenging operating 
environment, the Business leveraged market 
opportunities to deliver robust performance during 
the year. This was achieved on the back of your 
Company’s strong farm linkages and sourcing 
networks, multi-modal logistics capability, agile  
supply chain operations, focused scale up of  
Value-Added Agri Products (VAAP) portfolio and  
deep customer relationships. 
The scope and scale of operations of your Company’s 
Agri Business have grown manifold over the years 
and currently encompass over 4.5 million tonnes 
of annual volume throughput in 22 states and over 
20 agri-value chains. The strategic focus of the 
Business in recent years has been to accelerate 
growth by rapidly developing and scaling up VAAP 
straddling multiple value chains comprising Spices, 
Coffee, Frozen Marine Products and Processed Fruits 
amongst others. The portfolio continues to be rapidly 
scaled up, leveraging your Company’s deep rural 
linkages and extensive sourcing expertise enabling 
traceable, attribute based and identity-preserved 
Report of the Board of Directors
76
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
Your Company’s Agri Business has grown manifold over the years and currently  
encompass over 4.5 million tonnes of annual volume throughput in 22 states and  
over 20 agri-value chains. In recent years, the strategic focus has been  
to accelerate growth by rapidly developing and scaling up Value-Added  
Agri Products straddling multiple value chains comprising Spices, Coffee,  
Frozen Marine Products and Processed Fruits amongst others.

sourcing of agri-commodities, besides value addition 
through processing. 
–	 Your Company is a leading player in whole  
spices such as Chilli, Turmeric, Coriander and 
Cumin. In line with its strategy of enhancing  
value addition and ‘producing the buy’,  
the Business has, in recent years, scaled up its 
presence in ‘food safe’ markets viz. USA, EU 
and Japan, leveraging its key strengths such 
as identity-preserved sourcing expertise, strong 
backward integration, custody of supply chain and 
customer focused strategies. During the year, the 
Business consolidated its position as a preferred 
supplier in the food safe segment, private labels, 
steam sterilised and organic products. Addition of  
new export customers, improved product mix 
and higher offtake from large format players in 
modern retail and e-Commerce segments aided 
growth. The Business scaled up its Integrated 
Crop Management (ICM) programme, thereby 
enhancing its ability to produce food safe spices in 
a sustainable manner. The Business continues to 
partner with the various State Governments  
for production of food safe spices and has 
maintained an unblemished track record over  
the years in terms of compliance with stringent 
food safety parameters. The Business continues 
to pursue sustainable farm management practices 
anchored on Rainforest Alliance and Global GAP 
accreditation.
	
In this context, during the year, your Company  
has commissioned a world-class, state-of-the-art  
Spices processing facility in Andhra Pradesh. 
This facility, compliant with Global Food Safety 
standards, will enable your Company in expanding 
its customer base in food safe export markets, 
besides promoting inclusive spices value chains 
benefiting thousands of Indian farmers. 
–	 During the year, Coffee prices remained volatile 
in the international markets due to supply 
uncertainties in Brazil & Vietnam and muted 
demand in Europe due to recessionary trends. 
In the domestic market, lower availability of 
the crop led to high prices impacting demand. 
Notwithstanding these challenges, the Business 
registered strong growth leveraging its strategic 
presence in key coffee producing regions in  
India, deep understanding of estate and  
region-specific varieties and focus on premium 
grades of Arabica, Certified Coffees, Specialty and 
Monsooned Coffee. Apart from servicing the needs 
of leading coffee houses in the value-added space, 
the Business continues to source high quality 
coffee grades customised to the needs of your 
Company’s gourmet coffee brand, ‘Sunbean’. 
–	 Your Company is one of the leading exporters 
of value-added frozen marine products from 
India with expertise in processing individually 
quick-frozen (IQF), raw and cooked products, 
which adhere to the highest standards of safety 
and hygiene prevalent in developed markets 
such as the US, EU and Japan. During the year, 
the Business expanded its value-added shrimp 
portfolio to include Aquaculture Stewardship 
Council (ASC) certified products for EU markets. 
Leveraging its strong domain knowledge and 
sourcing expertise, the Business also supports 
the ‘ITC Master Chef’ range of ‘Super Safe’ frozen 
prawns in the domestic market and supplies 
high-quality shrimps to your Company’s Hotels 
Business.
–	 In the Processed Fruits & Vegetables segment, 
the Business continues to expand its footprint in 
categories of fruit pulp and tomato paste across 
conventional and certified segments through a 
robust collaborative network comprising a large 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
77
ITC Limited
Your Company has commissioned a world-class, 
 state-of-the-art Spices processing facility in Andhra Pradesh compliant  
with Global Food Safety standards. This will enable your Company in expanding 
its customer base in food safe export markets, besides promoting inclusive  
spices value chains benefiting thousands of Indian farmers.

number of small and marginal farmers across 
four states. 
The Business remains focused on expanding 
its scope of operations across identified agri 
commodities, including both fresh and processed 
products. As these businesses develop critical mass, 
the Business is also scaling up end-to-end presence 
across the value chain, supported by the R&D 
capabilities of your Company’s Life Sciences and 
Technology Centre and external collaborations. 
The Business is also scaling up its customised crop 
development programme in Madhya Pradesh to  
build deeper expertise in Medicinal and Aromatic 
Plant Extracts (MAPE). Collaborations with farmers 
are underway with the Business providing necessary 
inputs, advisory and on-field support. The Business 
is also focusing on developing unique value-added 
products by leveraging the research platforms of your 
Company’s Life Sciences and Technology Centre.
Towards enhancing the competitiveness of  
domestic agri-value chains, strengthening market 
linkages and further augmenting value creation 
opportunities, your Company has successfully  
scaled up ITCMAARS – a crop-agnostic full 
stack AgriTech platform, together with a ‘phygital’ 
ecosystem across nine states. Over 1150 Farmer 
Producer Organisations (FPOs) encompassing  
more than 5,00,000 farmers have been added to  
your Company’s network within a short period since  
launch. By synergistically integrating NextGen  
agri technologies, this initiative is creating a robust 
ecosystem to seamlessly deliver hyperlocal and 
personalised solutions to the farming community, 
whilst creating new and scalable revenue streams, 
strengthening sourcing efficiencies and powering your 
Company’s world-class Indian brands. These include 
an e-Marketplace for agri inputs and farm outputs, 
wide range of advisory services covering weather 
forecasts, agronomy, best practices for improved 
productivity, quality assurance, etc. The Business 
expects to rapidly scale up the initiative to create 
a unique platform providing significant competitive 
advantage to your Company’s Agri Business as also 
creating new revenue streams. 
Over the years, your Company has invested 
significantly in building competitively superior  
agri-commodity sourcing expertise comprising multiple 
business models, wide geographical spread and 
customised infrastructure. Rapid adoption of  
analytics-led smart procurement tools has further 
augmented the aforestated expertise. These 
capabilities and infrastructure have created structural 
advantages facilitating competitive sourcing of  
agri raw materials for your Company’s Branded 
Packaged Foods Businesses.
–	 The Business continues to leverage its strong 
farm linkages and wide sourcing network across 
geographies to secure supplies of critical grades 
of wheat of benchmark quality towards meeting 
the growing requirements of Aashirvaad atta. 
During the year, the Business further scaled up its 
strategic sourcing and supply chain interventions. 
These include focused crop development towards 
securing the right varieties for Aashirvaad atta to 
provide consumers best-in-class product quality 
and experience, use of multi-modal transportation, 
cost optimisation through geographical and varietal 
arbitrage as also enabling supply of attribute 
based/identity preserved crop. The Business also 
ramped up direct buying at various atta factories 
and scaled up utilisation of railway rakes for wheat 
transportation, which aided in containing the impact 
of inflation in freight costs. At the Kapurthala 
ICML plant, for instance, direct buying of wheat 
Report of the Board of Directors
78
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
Your Company has successfully scaled up ITCMAARS (Metamarket for Advanced 
Agriculture and Rural Services) – a crop-agnostic full stack AgriTech platform,  
together with a ‘phygital’ ecosystem across nine states with over  
1150 Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs). More than  
5,00,000 farmers have been added to your Company’s  
network within a short period.

offers substantial benefits to farmers including 
transparency in grading, weighment and pricing, 
besides delayering operations and enhancing 
sourcing & logistics efficiencies. This initiative is 
being scaled up through focused crop development 
in the area to upgrade crop quality.
–	 The Business continues to leverage its strong 
backward linkages and wide sourcing network 
across geographies to source high-quality fruit pulp 
and frozen vegetables for your Company’s  
‘B Natural’ and ‘Farmland’ brands. 
–	 Milk procurement network in Bihar and West 
Bengal was strengthened during the year towards  
meeting the growing requirements of your 
Company’s Fresh Dairy portfolio under the 
‘Aashirvaad Svasti’ brand, and in Punjab for 
‘Sunfeast’ Dairy Beverages. The Business 
continues to empower farmers by providing 
infrastructure such as automated milk collection 
units & chillers and imparting package of best 
practices to improve operational efficiency, maintain 
high quality and ensure identity preservation 
and traceability. The capability to source 
superior quality milk has enabled the scale-up 
of ‘Aashirvaad Svasti Easy Digest Milk’ – West 
Bengal’s first lactose free milk in pouch format and 
‘Sunfeast Protein Shake’ in the Fresh Dairy and 
Beverages categories respectively.
–	 The Business continues to scale up sourcing 
of spices to meet the growing requirements of 
Sunrise and Aashirvaad brands.
In recognition of the various initiatives undertaken 
by the Business to enable an agile, resilient and 
responsive sourcing and supply chain, your Company 
was recognised as the ‘Logistics and Supply Chain 
Innovation Company of the Year’ and ‘Best Innovator 
in Data and Analytics’ by ET Ascent and has also 
received recognition for its excellence under the  
Food, Perishables, Beverages & FMCG category  
by the CII SCALE Awards, 2022.
The Business continues to collaborate with reputed 
research organisations such as the Indian Agricultural 
Research Institute, Indian Institute of Wheat & Barley 
Research, Indian Institute of Rice Research, Indian 
Institute of Soybean Research, Indian Institute of 
Vegetable Research, Punjab Agricultural University 
and Agharkar Research Institute towards building an 
efficient and cost competitive agri-value chain. During 
the year, the Business further scaled up its wheat crop 
development programme and introduced  
location-specific new and superior seed varieties 
along with appropriate package of practices across 
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, 
Punjab, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra. Sharp 
focus on deepening capabilities in proprietary crop 
intelligence, scaling up the sourcing & delivery 
network and developing customised blends will 
support your Company’s Branded Packaged Foods 
Businesses in the years to come.
As stated earlier, in line with your Company’s 
commitment to empower farmers, your Company has 
developed a millets agri-value chain with special thrust 
on enhancing value-addition and market linkages. 
Your Company is also promoting FPOs in millet 
farming anchored by ITCMAARS. The Business  
has implemented two Public-Private Partnerships 
projects in Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh,  
in partnership with Indian Institute of Millets Research 
(IIMR), Hyderabad. Your Company remains 
committed to supporting the Government’s efforts to 
promote millets given their immense benefits in terms 
of nutritional properties and attributes as a planet  
friendly and climate resilient crop. 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
79
ITC Limited
In line with your Company’s commitment to empower farmers, a millets agri-value 
chain has been developed with special thrust on enhancing value-addition and 
market linkages. Your Company is also promoting FPOs in millet farming anchored 
by ITCMAARS. The Business has implemented two Public-Private Partnerships 
projects in Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh, in partnership with Indian Institute  
of Millets Research (IIMR), Hyderabad. Your Company remains committed  
to supporting the Government’s efforts to promote millets.

Your Company remains focused on developing 
climate smart agriculture systems which address 
the environmental and social impacts of climate 
change, enhance the resilience of agri-value chains, 
enable higher productivity and boost farmer incomes 
whilst also reducing emissions. Towards increasing 
resilience of agri-value chains, your Company adopts 
a systematic approach including measuring climate 
risk impacts of key crop value chains, promoting 
climate resilient crop varieties, deploying agronomical 
practices to conserve soil and water usage, etc. For 
instance, in wheat, rice and soyabean crop value 
chains, the Business has been helping farmers adopt 
climate resilient varieties which are tolerant to various 
biotic and abiotic stress. 
In line with the national goal of doubling farmers’ 
income, your Company remains committed to catalyse 
a transformational shift of the agri ecosystem from the 
conventional production-centric to demand-responsive 
value chains. Towards this, the Business continues 
to focus on developing NextGen Indian agriculture, 
anchored on ITCMAARS and climate smart agri-value 
chains with strong market linkages. The focus of these 
interventions is to reduce vulnerability and increase 
the resilience of farmers, while lowering greenhouse 
gas emissions and promoting food security. 
NOTES ON SUBSIDIARIES
The following may be read in conjunction with the 
Consolidated Financial Statements of your Company 
prepared in accordance with Indian Accounting 
Standard 110. Shareholders desirous of obtaining the 
Report and Accounts of your Company’s subsidiaries 
may obtain the same upon request. Further, the 
Report and Accounts of the subsidiary companies is 
also available under the ‘Investor Relations’ section 
of your Company’s website, www.itcportal.com, in 
a downloadable format. Your Company’s Policy for 
determination of a material subsidiary, as adopted 
by your Board, in conformity with Regulation 16 of 
the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing 
Obligations and Disclosure Requirements)  
Regulations 2015, can be accessed on your Company’s  
corporate website at https://www.itcportal.com/material- 
subsidiary-policy . Presently, your Company does not 
have any material subsidiary.
Surya Nepal Private Limited 
The Nepalese economy grew by 5.6% during the 
fiscal year ended July 2022, as against a growth of 
4.8% in the previous year. However, surging inflation 
on account of high fuel and other commodity prices 
spurred by geopolitical developments and external 
sector imbalances emerged as major challenges 
for the economy. Nepal Rastra Bank along with the 
Government of Nepal responded to these challenges 
through multiple policy actions such as increase in 
interest rates and imposition of restrictions on import 
of certain luxury goods from April to December 2022. 
These policy measures along with robust inward 
remittances helped stabilise the country’s current 
account and balance of payments. Nepal’s foreign 
exchange reserves increased to US$ 10.7 billion 
in March 2023, from US$ 9.5 billion in July 2022, 
representing around nine months of import cover. 
Although the external sector has seen a marked 
improvement in the latter half of the period under 
review, high inflation, muted domestic demand and 
gradual unwinding of stimulus provided during the 
pandemic continues to pose significant challenges 
for the economy. As per a recent report from National 
Statistics Office, Nepal’s GDP growth is estimated to 
remain subdued at 1.9% for the fiscal year ending July 
2023. Measures towards encouraging Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) in the country, incentivising domestic 
manufacturing to substitute imports, promoting the 
hospitality sector which has significant potential to 
generate foreign exchange earnings and employment, 
on-ground implementation of reforms and promulgation 
of industry-friendly policies continue to remain the key 
imperatives for sustained economic growth. 
The legal cigarette industry is a major contributor to 
the manufacturing sector of the country. The industry 
provides livelihoods, directly and indirectly, to more 
than five lakh farmers, farm workers and others 
engaged in the cultivation and trade of tobacco 
products. However, the legal cigarette industry 
continues to face significant challenges from a 
punitive and discriminatory taxation and regulatory 
regime. The company continues to engage with policy 
makers for equitable, non-discriminatory, pragmatic, 
evidence-based regulations and taxation policies that 
Report of the Board of Directors
80
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

balance the economic imperatives of the country and 
tobacco control objectives.
Despite a challenging economic environment, 
the company reinforced its market standing in the 
Cigarettes business by leveraging its robust portfolio, 
superior product quality and wide distribution network. 
Differentiated and innovative offerings launched 
under the ‘Naulo’ and ‘Shaan’ brand during the year 
received encouraging response. 
The company’s manufacturing systems continued  
to set new benchmarks in responsiveness, quality and 
productivity. Various initiatives such as installation  
of state-of-the-art technologies and process 
automation were implemented during the year which 
further strengthened the manufacturing capability 
of the company. Relentless focus on developing 
world-class products anchored on innovation and 
benchmarked international quality standards remains 
a key source of sustainable competitive advantage  
for the company.
During the year, the company continued to strengthen 
its market standing in the Agarbatti business 
leveraging its differentiated product portfolio, sharply 
focused marketing investments and best-in-class 
product availability across target markets. The  
product portfolio was augmented with the launch 
of new variants such as ‘Pushpanjali’, ‘Indreni’ and 
‘Champa Ziplock’.
The Confectionery business continues to make 
focused investments towards strengthening its market 
standing. During the year, two new flavours were 
launched - ‘Toffichoo Chatpata Fun’ and ‘Toffichoo 
Tadka Lichhi’ which have received encouraging 
consumer response. 
The company continues to make multi-dimensional 
contributions towards building the societal and 
economic capital of Nepal. Key interventions are 
summarised below: 
−	 create agri-infrastructure such as vermicompost 
pits and harvesting sheds for farmers near the 
company’s operating locations, 
−	 provide training to improve productivity and 
enhance income generation for farmers through 
animal husbandry extension services to improve 
breeding, health and nutrition for livestock, 
−	 enhance quality of education in public schools in 
the vicinity of the company’s operating locations, 
−	 develop public infrastructure in catchment areas of 
operating locations, 
−	 participate in environment preservation through 
measures such as urban plantation, biodiversity 
preservation and solid waste management.
In addition to the above, the company partnered with 
the Nepal Army in its Mountain Clean-up campaign 
during the year which involved cleaning four mountain 
peaks including Mt. Everest. 
During the year, the company recorded Revenue 
from Operations of NRs. 4953 crores (previous year 
NRs. 4382 crores) and Net Profit of NRs. 1088 crores 
(previous year NRs. 1005 crores). 
The company declared and paid a dividend of  
NRs. 516 per equity share of NRs. 100 each for the 
year ended July, 2022 (Asadh, 2079), amounting to 
NRs. 1040 crores (previous year NRs. 467 per equity 
share amounting to NRs. 941 crores).
The company is well-positioned to consolidate its 
leadership position by leveraging its robust portfolio 
of products, deep & wide distribution network, best-
in-class manufacturing facilities and execution 
excellence while rapidly scaling up the newer FMCG 
businesses and evaluating emerging opportunities in 
this space. The company continues to be the largest 
contributor to the exchequer in Nepal.
ITC Infotech India Limited and its subsidiaries 
The Indian Information Technology (IT) Industry 
remained resilient during the year in the backdrop 
of heightened uncertainty in the global economic 
environment. According to NASSCOM estimates, 
India’s technology sector revenues grew by 8.4% in 
FY 2022-23 to US$ 245 billion, with IT Services also 
growing at 8.3% on a high base. The technology 
industry continues to play a pivotal role in enabling 
organisations to accelerate digital transformation, 
optimise costs and enhance operational efficiencies. 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
81
ITC Limited

The company continues to sharpen its focus on the 
strategic pillars of Customer Centricity, Employee 
Centricity and Operational Excellence, while building 
differentiated offerings around the strategic areas of 
Cloud Technologies, Digital Workplace Solutions, 
Digital Manufacturing, Customer Experience and Data 
Analytics. During the year, the company recorded 
robust growth in revenue on the back of strong 
traction in the Americas, India and Rest of World 
markets. Industry 4.0 solutions and Digital Experience 
using data analytics and Infrastructure services were 
the key drivers of growth. 
During the year, the company entered into a strategic 
partnership agreement with PTC Inc. to accelerate 
customer digital transformation initiatives and the 
adoption of PTC’s industry-leading Windchill® 
product lifecycle management (PLM) software as a 
service (SaaS). Further, the company commenced a 
new service line ‘Digital transforms Physical’ (DxP) 
Services, comprising a global ecosystem of PLM-led 
Digital Thread and SaaS experts, bringing together 
professionals from both companies into a unified 
global practice which will create offerings, including 
the tooling and methodologies required, and execute 
programs to accelerate the adoption of PTC’s next 
generation PLM solutions.
The company also continued to forge new alliances 
and strengthen existing relationships with Independent 
Software Vendors (ISVs) in focus areas such as 
Digital Workplace Solutions, Digital Manufacturing 
and Data analytics. These partnerships are aligned 
to the company’s vision of taking a leadership role 
in enabling the Digital Transformation and SaaS 
adoption journey of its clients. The company also 
expanded its global footprint by setting up new 
subsidiaries and branches across several focus 
geographies.
To fulfil the demand for talent to support growing 
business requirements, the company continues to 
invest in hiring, training and retaining high-quality 
talent while shaping its differentiated employee value 
proposition built on the core tenets of a compelling 
purpose & culture, holistic well-being and global 
career opportunities. Further, the company’s  
‘Hire-from-Anywhere’ recruitment model continues to 
attract quality talent across Tier 1 and Tier 2 cities. 
During the year, the company’s consolidated 
Total Income grew by 16.6 % to ` 3363.06 crores 
(previous year ` 2884.30 crores). This was driven 
by the increasing traction in the company’s strategic 
accounts as well as revenues from the DxP Services 
line. Profit Before Tax stood at ` 529.66 crores 
(previous year ` 719.64 crores) and Net Profit stood 
at ` 405.25 crores (previous year ` 541.04 crores) 
after considering certain costs associated with the 
Strategic Partner Agreement with PTC Inc., resource 
augmentation, steep escalation in manpower costs 
and accelerated investments in capability building in 
strategic focus areas and infrastructure. 
For the year under review: 
a.	 ITC Infotech India Limited recorded Revenue from 
Operations of ` 2632.30 crores (previous year 
` 2288.57 crores) and Net Profit of ` 353.38 crores 
(previous year ` 517.81 crores). The company paid 
a total dividend of ` 17 per Equity Share of ` 10/- 
each aggregating ` 149.60 crores (previous year 
` 53 per Equity Share of ` 10/- each aggregating 
` 451.56 crores). 
b.	 ITC Infotech Limited, UK, a wholly-owned 
subsidiary of the company, recorded Revenue 
of GBP 30.30 million (previous year GBP 40.02 
million) and Net Profit of GBP 1.45 million 
(previous year GBP 0.79 million). 
c.	 ITC Infotech (USA), Inc., a wholly-owned 
subsidiary of the company, together with its  
wholly-owned subsidiary Indivate Inc., recorded 
Revenue of US$ 149.28 million (previous year  
US$ 133.76 million) and Net Profit of US$ 4.68 
million (previous year US$ 2.53 million). 
d.	 ITC Infotech Do Brasil LTDA., a wholly-owned 
subsidiary of the company incorporated in October 
2022, recorded Revenue of BRL 1.37 million and 
Net Profit of BRL 0.12 million. 
e.	 The subsidiaries in Malaysia, France and Germany 
were incorporated in February and March 2023 
and are expected to be fully operational in the 
next year.
Report of the Board of Directors
82
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

The company’s business-friendly solutions and  
new-age capabilities continued to gain global 
recognition. The company was positioned as 
‘Innovator’ in Avasant’s CPG Digital Services 2022-23  
RadarView™, ‘Disruptor’ in Avasant’s Digital CX 
Services 2022-23 RadarView™, Digital Workplace 
Services 2022 RadarView™, Manufacturing Digital 
Services 2022-2023 RadarView™, Intelligent 
Automation Services 2022-23 RadarView™ and 
featured as ‘Challenger’ in their GCC Region Digital 
Services 2022-23 RadarView™. The company’s 
Automation capabilities were positioned in the 
‘Leadership Zone’ in Zinnov Zones Hyperintelligent 
Automation Services H1 2023 for Intelligent 
Automation Services – Retail, CPG and mid-tier 
service providers and Robotic Process Automation 
Services (mid-tier service providers). 
The company continues to fulfil its vision of providing 
business-friendly solutions to clients. As clients 
across industries and geographies look to drive cost 
efficiencies while sustaining growth momentum,  
the company is focused on being their trusted 
partner in this journey. Towards this, the company 
will continue to make client and employee-focused 
investments to enable clients accelerate their journey 
of growth and differentiation. An endorsement of this 
strategy has been the winning of a significant  
multi-million, multi-year engagement during the year, 
with an existing marquee client which will bolster  
mid-term revenue growth.
Technico Agri Sciences Limited
During the year under review, potato production in 
India stood at 51 million MT, lower by 5% compared 
to the previous year. The drop in crop production led 
to stocks being warehoused in anticipation of higher 
post-harvest prices. However, as the year progressed, 
demand for seeds remained subdued on account of 
lower planting due to heavy and continuous rains. 
This resulted in a pile up of seed inventory in cold 
stores, leading to a drop in seed prices during the 
peak selling season.
Amidst a challenging operating environment 
as aforestated, the company delivered resilient 
performance by leveraging institutional strengths, 
strong market linkages, superior product quality and 
wide distribution network. 
The company’s leadership in production of early 
generation seed potatoes and strength in agronomy 
continue to support the ‘Bingo!’ range of potato chips 
of your Company and in servicing the seed potato 
requirements of the farmer base of your Company’s 
Agri Business. 
The company’s Revenue from Operations stood at 
` 257.77 crores (previous year ` 256.67 crores)  
with Net Profit of ` 41.38 crores (previous year  
` 43.04 crores). Total Comprehensive Income  
for the year stood at ` 41.42 crores (previous year  
` 43.04 crores).
The company continues to build on a strong 
foundation for the future and remains confident of 
effectively leveraging its deep domain expertise to 
fortify its market standing in the seed potato industry. 
Technico Pty Limited and its subsidiaries 
The company continues to focus on upgradation 
and commercialisation of its TECHNITUBER® Seed 
Technology and customising its application across 
various geographies. Further, the company is also 
engaged in the marketing of TECHNITUBER® seed 
produced at the facilities of its subsidiaries in China 
and Canada and Technico Agri Sciences Limited, 
India, a wholly-owned subsidiary of your Company, to 
global customers. For the year under review:
a.	 Technico Pty Limited, Australia registered a 
turnover of Australian Dollar (A$) 1.83 million 
(previous year A$ 1.86 million) and a Net Profit of 
A$ 1.04 million (previous year A$ 0.91 million). 
b.	 Technico Asia Holdings Pty Limited, Australia, 
Technico Technologies Inc., Canada and Technico 
Horticultural (Kunming) Co. Limited, China – there 
were no significant events to report with respect to 
the above companies.
WelcomHotels Lanka (Private) Limited 
WelcomHotels Lanka (Private) Limited (WLPL), 
a wholly-owned subsidiary of your Company, was 
incorporated in Sri Lanka in April 2012, with the 
objective of developing and operating a mixed-use 
development project (‘Project’) comprising a luxury 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
83
ITC Limited

hotel and a super-premium residential apartment 
complex, situated on 5.86 acres of prime sea-facing 
land in Colombo.
The Project has been accorded the status of a 
‘Strategic Development Project’ entitling the company 
to various fiscal benefits in Sri Lanka. Further, the 
Project is also exempt from Sri Lankan foreign 
exchange regulations.
Project construction activity, which was running 
on schedule till Q3 of FY 2018-19, was adversely 
impacted due to disruptions in the aftermath of the 
terror incidents in 2019, recurrent waves of the COVID 
pandemic and thereafter by the challenging  
socio-economic and operating conditions prevailing 
in the country over the last 18 months. The situation 
in the country is progressively returning to normalcy. 
The Government of Sri Lanka has undertaken several 
steps to stabilise the economy; these include securing 
financial assistance from multi-lateral agencies and 
other countries, increasing interest rates to curb 
inflation, restricting non-essential imports to conserve 
foreign exchange, introduction of taxes to boost 
Government revenues, etc. During the year,  
Sri Lanka secured a 48-month Extended Fund  
Facility from the International Monetary Fund of  
US$ 2.9 billion to support Sri Lanka’s economic 
policies and reforms. 
Amidst the aforementioned challenges and 
operational constraints, the company remains focused 
on completing the Project in an expeditious manner. 
While the macro-economic challenges faced by  
the country have impacted the sales velocity of  
‘The Sapphire Residences’ luxury apartments, given 
its unique positioning in the market and superior  
value proposition, the company expects the same to  
gain momentum with improved stability in the  
macro-economic environment and as the project 
nears completion, in line with the trend in other 
projects in Colombo.
Your Company’s investment in WLPL stood at  
` 2775 crores as at 31st March, 2023. 
Landbase India Limited
The company owns and operates the Classic Golf & 
Country Club, a 27-hole Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf 
Course - which continues to enjoy strong brand equity 
with its members, guests and the golfing fraternity. 
During the year, the Club hosted several prestigious 
tournaments and sustained its leadership position in 
the corporate tournament segment in the Delhi-NCR 
area. The Club continues to remain an ‘Asian Tour 
Destinations Member’, the only one in the country and 
among 12 in Asia. 
Continuing with its endeavour to promote Junior Golf 
for the future generation of Golfers, the Club gained 
the status of becoming a ‘US Kids Destination Course’ 
during the year.
The company also owns ‘ITC Grand Bharat’ – a  
104-key all-suite luxury retreat at Gurugram, which 
has been licensed to your Company. The retreat, 
an oasis of unhurried luxury, is co-located with 
the company’s prestigious Classic Golf & Country 
Club. During the year, ITC Grand Bharat received 
several prestigious awards that reflect the industry’s 
acknowledgement of exceptional hospitality offered 
by the property. Aravali Pavilion, the retreat’s all day 
dining restaurant, was recognised as the ‘Best All Day 
Dining Restaurant’ in the 5-star hotel category at  
‘The Big Foodie Awards’. Additionally, Kaya Kalp -  
The Royal Spa won the ‘Sattva Iconic Wellness 
Awards’ in the ‘Wellness Spa of the Year’ category. 
During the year ended 31st March, 2023, the 
company recorded Total Income of ` 37.21 crores 
(previous year ` 29.46 crores) and Net Profit of 
` 9.68 crores (previous year ` 2.85 crores). Total 
Comprehensive Income for the year stood at ` 9.60 
crores (previous year ` 2.88 crores).
Srinivasa Resorts Limited
The company owns ‘ITC Kakatiya’ – a 188-key 
luxury hotel located in Hyderabad, which is operated 
and marketed by your Company. ITC Kakatiya is a 
USGBC LEED Platinum Certified hotel. During the 
year, the property also received a ‘Platinum +’ We 
Assure Certification under DNV’s My Care Infection 
Risk Management Programme. The property has 
received several accolades, establishing itself as one 
of the finest luxury hotels and F&B destinations in the 
Report of the Board of Directors
84
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

city. ‘Dakshin’ was adjudged the ‘Best South Indian 
Fine Dining Restaurant’ for the 13th consecutive year  
and ‘Gourmet Couch’ was adjudged the ‘Best 
Takeaway’ for the third consecutive year at the Times 
Food Guide Nightlife Awards 2023.
Pursuant to easing of travel restrictions, the hotel 
witnessed strong recovery in demand during the 
year with revenues surpassing pre-pandemic levels. 
Investments in digital initiatives continued to be 
leveraged to enhance guest experience and drive  
cost optimisation. 
During the year ended 31st March, 2023, the 
company recorded Total Income of ` 72.46 crores 
(previous year ` 44.86 crores) with Net Profit of  
` 7.55 crores (previous year Net loss ` 1.63 crores). 
Total Comprehensive Income for the year stood at  
` 7.51 crores (previous year (-)` 1.59 crores).
Fortune Park Hotels Limited
The company, which caters to the ‘Mid-market to 
Upscale’ Business Hotels segment under the brand 
‘Fortune’, continues to forge new alliances and 
expand its footprint. During the year, five hotels were 
launched under the brand. Further, with three new 
alliances signed during the year, the company has an 
aggregate inventory of nearly 4400 rooms across  
57 properties and 49 cities of India. Of these,  
43 hotels are in operation while the remaining  
14 hotels are in various stages of development, and 
are slated to be commissioned in the near term.
During the year, the company registered strong 
growth in revenue and profits with both business 
and leisure segments witnessing significant traction. 
The brand’s leadership in the target segment was 
also acknowledged during the year, with the company 
receiving the ‘Today’s Traveller Award 2022 for Best 
Upscale Business & Leisure Hotel Brand’ as well as 
the ‘VETA 2023 Award for Most Preferred Premium 
Business & Leisure Hotel Brand’.
During the year ended 31st March, 2023, the company 
recorded Total Income of ` 44.35 crores (previous 
year ` 25.39 crores) and Net Profit of ` 5.34 crores 
(previous year ` 0.19 crore). Total Comprehensive 
Income for the year stood at ` 5.20 crores (previous 
year ` 0.28 crore).
The Board of Directors of the company has 
recommended a dividend of ` 12.50 per Equity Share 
of ` 10 each for the year ended 31st March, 2023 
(previous year Nil).
Bay Islands Hotels Limited 
The company’s hotel in Port Blair, licensed to your 
Company, continues to offer a unique gateway to 
the Andamans with its strategic location, excellent 
architectural design and, superior product and 
service quality. 
Tourism in the Andamans rebounded post easing of 
travel restrictions that had been imposed during the 
pandemic. However, airport operations at Port Blair 
continued to remain affected due to ongoing renovation 
activities, impacting tourist arrivals to the island.
During the year ended 31st March, 2023, the 
company recorded Total Income of ` 2.75 crores 
(previous year ` 1.61 crores) and Net Profit and Total 
Comprehensive Income of ` 1.92 crores (previous 
year ` 1.14 crores).
The Board of Directors of the company has 
recommended a dividend of ` 80.00 per Equity Share 
of ` 100 each for the year ended 31st March, 2023 
(previous year ` 70.00 per Equity Share). 
Wimco Limited
The company’s business activities comprise 
fabrication and assembly of machinery for tube filling, 
cartoning, wrapping, material handling including 
conveyor solutions and engineering services for the 
FMCG and Pharmaceutical industries.
During the year, the company’s order book remained 
muted amidst a challenging operating environment. 
The company’s Revenue from Operations for the year 
stood at ` 11.46 crores (previous year ` 11.62 crores) 
with a Net Profit of ` 0.16 crore (previous year  
Net Loss of ` 0.42 crore). Total Comprehensive 
Income for the year stood at ` 0.21 crore  
(previous year (-) ` 0.44 crore). 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
85
ITC Limited

North East Nutrients Private Limited
Your Company holds 76% equity stake in North East 
Nutrients Private Limited, which has set up a food 
processing facility in Mangaldoi, Assam, to cater to 
the fast-growing biscuits market in Assam and other 
north-eastern states. 
During the year, unprecedented inflation in  
input costs were effectively mitigated by the  
company on the back of focused approach towards 
consistently improved operational efficiency and 
productivity. In recognition of its high standards of 
quality, the company received two Gold Awards  
at the ‘Convention on Quality Concepts’, 2022 
organised by Quality Circle Forum of India,  
Kolkata Chapter and a Bronze Award at the  
‘CII National Kaizen Competition’. 
The company’s Revenue from Operations for the 
year stood at ` 160.69 crores (previous year ` 163.90 
crores), while Net Profit for the year increased 
to ` 15.98 crores (previous year ` 14.43 crores). 
Total Comprehensive Income for the year stood at 
` 16.14 crores (previous year ` 14.37 crores). 
Further, during the year, the company redeemed the 
10% Cumulative Non-Convertible Preference Shares 
aggregating ` 18.00 crores held by your Company. 
Pursuant to the redemption, the company has  
become debt free.
ITC IndiVision Limited 
ITC IndiVision Limited (IIVL) was incorporated as a 
wholly-owned subsidiary of your Company on  
9th July, 2020.
The company has made substantial progress during 
the year towards construction of the manufacturing 
facility near Mysuru, Karnataka, primarily for the 
manufacture and export of nicotine and nicotine 
derivative products. Regulatory approvals for 
commencing trials and commissioning are in the 
process of being obtained. 
The facility is geared to manufacture purest nicotine 
derivatives conforming to US and EU pharmacopoeia 
standards.
Your Company’s investment in IIVL stood at  
` 280 crores as at 31st March, 2023. 
Russell Credit Limited
The company recorded Total Income of ` 48.61 crores 
(previous year ` 41.56 crores) and Net Profit of  
` 38.30 crores (previous year ` 33.46 crores) driven 
by increase in the yield of its financial investments on 
the back of increase in market interest rates. 
Total Comprehensive Income for the year stood  
at ` 55.24 crores (previous year ` 120.79 crores).  
The company continues to closely monitor its 
investments in line with market interest rate 
movements and explore opportunities to make 
strategic investments for the ITC Group. 
Temporary surplus liquidity of the company is  
mainly deployed in bonds, government securities, 
debt mutual funds, bank fixed deposits etc.  
For FY 2022-23, the Board of Directors of the 
company has recommended a final dividend of  
` 0.29 per Equity Share of ` 10 each, aggregating  
` 18.75 crores (previous year interim dividend of 
` 0.19 per Equity Share of ` 10 each and a final 
dividend of ` 0.06 per Equity Share of ` 10 each, 
aggregating ` 16.16 crores). 
Gold Flake Corporation Limited
The company holds 50% equity stake in  
ITC Essentra Limited – a joint venture with Essentra 
Filter Products International Limited, UK. During the 
year, the company recorded Total Income of  
` 19.97 crores (previous year ` 17.29 crores) and  
Net Profit of ` 18.42 crores (previous year  
` 16.08 crores). The company declared interim 
dividend of ` 11.30 per Equity Share of ` 10 each, 
aggregating ` 18.08 crores (previous year  
` 10.00 per Equity Share of ` 10 each, aggregating  
` 16.00 crores). 
Greenacre Holdings Limited
The company provides maintenance services for 
commercial office buildings, engineering, procurement 
and construction management services as well as 
project management consultancy services.
During the year, the company recorded Total Income 
of ` 8.30 crores (previous year ` 8.09 crores) and Net 
Profit of ` 1.99 crores (previous year ` 1.79 crores).
Report of the Board of Directors
86
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

ITC Integrated Business Services Limited 
(Formerly known as ITC Investments &  
Holdings Limited)
Until FY 2021-22, the company was an  
‘Unregistered Core Investment Company’ within 
the meaning of the Core Investment Companies 
(Reserve Bank) Directions, 2016. During the year, 
the company entered into the business of providing 
support to the Business Shared Services operations 
of your Company. For this purpose, the company 
also changed its name to ‘ITC Integrated Business 
Services Limited’ with effect from 20th December, 
2022. Accordingly, the company ceased to be  
an ‘Unregistered Core Investment Company’  
as aforesaid.
During the year, the company recorded Total Income 
of ` 0.65 crore (previous year ` 0.05 crore) and Net 
Profit of ` 0.04 crore (previous year ` 0.01 crore).
MRR Trading & Investment Company Limited 
The company, a wholly-owned subsidiary of ITC 
Integrated Business Services Limited (formerly ITC 
Investments & Holdings Limited), holds tenancy rights 
in a commercial building located in Mumbai and also 
provides estate maintenance services. 
During the year, the company recorded Total Income 
of ` 7.25 lakhs (previous year ` 7.25 lakhs) and Net 
Profit of ` 0.28 lakh (previous year ` 0.13 lakh).
Pavan Poplar Limited 
The operations of the company continue to be 
adversely impacted pursuant to the Order of the 
Honourable High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital in 
February 2014 dismissing the Writ Petition filed by the 
company against the Order of the District Magistrate 
authorising the State authorities to take possession 
of the land leased to the company. The Appeal filed 
by the company against the aforestated Order was 
admitted in April 2014 and the matter is pending 
before the Honourable High Court. 
During the year, the company recorded Total Income 
of ` 0.12 crore (previous year ` 0.05 crore) and  
Net Loss of ` 0.03 crore (previous year Net Loss of  
` 0.04 crore). 
Prag Agro Farm Limited 
The operations of the company continue to be 
adversely impacted by the Order of the Honourable 
High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital in February 
2014 dismissing the Writ Petition filed by the company 
against the Order of the District Magistrate authorising 
the State authorities to take possession of the land 
leased to the company. The Appeal filed by the 
company against the aforestated Order was admitted 
in April 2014 and the matter has been pending before 
the Honourable High Court. 
During the year, the company recorded Total Income 
of ` 0.11 crore (previous year ` 0.09 crore) and Net 
Loss of ` 0.05 crore (previous year Net Loss of  
` 0.05 crore).
ITC Fibre Innovations Limited
The company was incorporated as a wholly owned 
subsidiary of your Company in March 2023 with the 
objective of foraying into the Moulded Fibre Products 
(MFP) space. Moulded Fibre Products, made from 
renewable natural fibres such as wood/bamboo 
or bagasse, offer sustainable packaging solutions 
across industries including food service & delivery, 
pharmaceutical, beauty and electronics. 
In the first phase, a state-of-the-art manufacturing 
facility is being set up at Badiyakhedi, Madhya 
Pradesh, to pursue identified opportunities in this 
rapidly evolving space.
NOTES ON JOINT VENTURES
ITC Essentra Limited
The company registered strong growth during the 
year aided by recovery in the macro-economic 
environment, agility in execution and effective 
customer service, in spite of significant volatility in 
supply chains for certain input materials. 
The company retained its leadership position of being 
the preferred supply chain partner for several  
well-known national and international brands leveraging 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
87
ITC Limited

its core strengths of strong customer relationships, 
focused innovation, best-in-class quality and 
consistent delivery. 
The company continues to partner with its customers 
and make investments in technology upgradation and 
capability building towards sustaining its position as 
the ‘innovation and quality benchmark’ in the Indian 
cigarette filter industry. The company has further 
expanded its specialty filters capacity in line with 
its strategy of offering a wide range of innovative 
products to its customers including filter offerings with 
sustainable materials.
During the year ended 31st March, 2023, the 
company’s Revenue from Operations stood at 
` 545.66 crores (previous year ` 385.62 crores).  
Net Profit during the year stood at ` 64.77 crores 
(previous year ` 41.09 crores). 
The Board of Directors has recommended a dividend 
of ` 100 per equity share of ` 10 each for the year 
ended 31st March, 2023 (previous year ` 80 per 
equity share). 
Maharaja Heritage Resorts Limited
Maharaja Heritage Resorts Limited (MHRL), a joint 
venture of your Company with Jodhana Heritage 
Resorts Private Limited, currently operates 36 
heritage properties across 14 States in India under the 
‘WelcomHeritage’ brand. The portfolio of properties, 
comprising ‘Legend Hotels’, ‘Heritage Hotels’ and 
‘Nature Resorts’, provides uniquely differentiated 
offerings to guests in the cultural, heritage, nature, 
wildlife and adventure tourism segments respectively. 
During the year ended 31st March, 2023,  
the company recorded Total Income of ` 7.20 crores 
(previous year ` 4.70 crores) and Net Profit of  
` 0.51 crore (previous year ` 0.28 crore). Total 
Comprehensive Income for the year stood at  
` 0.49 crore (previous year ` 0.29 crore).
Espirit Hotels Private Limited
Espirit Hotels Private Limited (EHPL) was set up  
as a joint venture between your Company and  
the Ambience Group, Hyderabad, for developing a 
luxury hotel complex at Begumpet, Hyderabad.  
Under the terms of the Joint Venture Agreement,  
your Company had acquired 26% equity stake in 
EHPL. Your Company’s investment in EHPL stood  
at ` 46.51 crores as at 31st March, 2023.
As reported in prior years, the Ambience Group 
had expressed its desire to review the timing of 
further investments in EHPL, citing concerns about 
the viability of the project in view of the challenging 
economic environment and the sluggish demand 
conditions currently prevailing in the relevant market.
Your Company had been exploring its options in 
this regard.
On 7th April, 2023, your Company divested its entire 
shareholding i.e. 26% of the paid-up share capital, 
held in EHPL, consequent to which EHPL ceased to 
be a joint venture of your Company with effect from 
the said date.
Logix Developers Private Limited 
Logix Developers Private Limited (LDPL) is a joint 
venture between your Company and Logix Estates 
Private Limited for developing a luxury hotel-cum-service 
apartment complex at the company’s leasehold 
site located at Sector 105 in New Okhla Industrial 
Development Authority (NOIDA). Your Company 
presently holds 27.9% equity stake in LDPL. 
As reported in prior years, your Company reiterated 
its position with the JV partner that it was committed 
to developing a luxury hotel-cum-service apartment 
complex as envisaged under the JV Agreement and 
that it was not interested in progressing with any 
alternative project plans proposed by the JV partner. 
However, the JV partner refused to progress the 
project and instead expressed its intent to exit from 
the JV by selling its stake to your Company. 
Subsequently, the JV partner proposed that both 
parties should find a third party to sell the entire 
shareholding in LDPL. In view of these developments, 
your Company had filed a petition before the erstwhile 
Company Law Board submitting that the affairs of the 
JV entity were being conducted in a manner that was 
prejudicial to the interest of your Company and the 
Report of the Board of Directors
88
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

JV entity. The matter is currently before the National 
Company Law Tribunal (NCLT). The JV partner had 
also filed a petition before the Honourable Delhi High 
Court for winding up the JV company, which was 
transferred to the NCLT by the Honourable Delhi 
High Court. The matter was heard before the NCLT 
on several occasions in the past but could not be 
concluded. On 21st January, 2020, the matter was 
assigned to a new bench, post which hearings on the 
matter are being held.
In July 2022, LDPL received a communication from 
NOIDA authorities intimating cancellation of the 
sub-lease for the land on which the project was to 
be constructed on account of non-payment of lease 
instalments and non-fulfilment of the conditions of 
the sub-lease, including forfeiture of the amount 
deposited. The company is evaluating all options to 
pursue its rights in the matter. Consequently, as a 
matter of prudence, the company had derecognised 
the leasehold land/assets as well as adjusted/
reversed the lease liabilities towards NOIDA in 
accordance with the terms of the sub-lease deed,  
as an adjusting event in terms of Ind AS 10 – “Events 
after the Reporting Period” in its financial statements 
for the year ended 31st March 2022. 
During the year ended 31st March, 2023, the 
company recorded a Net profit of ` 0.16 crore 
(previous year ` 152.56 crores, including exceptional 
item of ` 152.45 crores on account of aforesaid 
derecognition/adjustment of balances in respect of 
leasehold land). The Net Worth of the company stood 
at ` 5.10 crores as at 31st March, 2023 (previous year 
` 4.94 crores). 
Your Company’s total investment in LDPL was  
` 41.95 crores. Your Company had made provisions 
aggregating ` 33.45 crores towards diminution in the 
carrying value of investment in LDPL in the previous 
years and has made additional provision of ` 8.50 
crores in the current year. Consequently, the carrying 
value of your Company’s investment in LDPL as at 
31st March, 2023, is Nil.
The financial statements of LDPL for the year ended 
31st March, 2023, are yet to be approved by its 
Board of Directors. In the absence of audited financial 
statements of LDPL, the Consolidated Financial 
Statements of your Company for the year ended 
31st March, 2023, have been prepared based on the 
financial statements prepared by the management 
of LDPL.
NOTES ON ASSOCIATES
International Travel House Limited
The company offers a full range of business travel 
solutions for domestic and international travel 
including air ticketing, car rentals, hotel arrangements, 
meetings & events, leisure services and foreign 
exchange. Business travel improved during the 
year aided by improved sentiments and easing of 
travel restrictions. Travel solutions offered by the 
company witnessed positive traction during the year. 
Structural cost interventions over the years also aided 
improvement in profitability. The company continues 
to leverage the safety and hygiene initiatives adopted 
across its mobility services. Further, in line with 
its initiatives towards embedding sustainability in 
business operations, the company also introduced 
electric vehicles during the year. Digital interventions 
to enhance customer service and efficiency were 
strengthened with the roll out of the company’s new 
self-booking tool, providing state-of-the-art, unique 
solutions for business travel. 
During the year ended 31st March, 2023, the company 
recorded a Total Income of ` 186.90 crores (previous 
year ` 96.51 crores) and Net Profit of ` 28.39 crores 
(previous year Net Loss of ` 10.70 crores).  
Total Comprehensive Income for the year stood at  
` 27.94 crores (previous year (-) ` 10.18 crores).
Gujarat Hotels Limited 
The company’s hotel, ‘Welcomhotel Vadodara’, 
is operated by your Company under an Operating 
License Agreement. 
The Hotel witnessed progressive recovery during 
the year driven by resumption of business and 
international travel. 
During the financial year ended 31st March, 2023,  
the company recorded a Total Income of ` 5.63 crores 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
89
ITC Limited

(previous year ` 3.57 crores), Net Profit and Total 
Comprehensive Income of ` 4.25 crores (previous 
year ` 2.72 crores). The Board of Directors of the 
company has recommended a dividend of ` 2 per 
Equity Share of ` 10/- each for the year ended  
31st March, 2023 (previous year ` 2 per Equity Share).
ATC Limited (an associate of Gold Flake 
Corporation Limited) 
The company is a contract manufacturer of cigarettes. 
The company has continued to maintain high levels 
of operational responsiveness and benchmark 
quality in its manufacturing operations to service its 
customers. During the year, the company received 
the ‘CII National Award for Excellence in Energy 
Management’ and a Certificate of Appreciation for 
Occupational Safety and Health from NSCI. 
During the year, the company recorded Total Income 
of ` 30.95 crores (previous year ` 27.11 crores) and 
Net Profit of ` 1.26 crores (previous year  
` 0.35 crore).
Delectable Technologies Private Limited 
Delectable Technologies Private Limited (Delectable) 
is, inter alia, engaged in the sale of FMCG products 
leveraging app-based technology through vending 
machines, primarily installed across office locations. 
During the year, your Company invested ` 1.88 crores 
towards the fourth tranche of Compulsorily 
Convertible Preference Shares offered by Delectable. 
Consequently, your Company’s effective shareholding 
in Delectable increased to 33.42% (previous year 
27.34%) on a fully diluted basis. 
The company’s revenues progressively recovered 
during the year with the reopening of offices and 
surpassed pre-pandemic levels by the end of FY 
2022-23. The company continues to expand its 
footprint through installation of new vending machines.
Mother Sparsh Baby Care Private Limited
During the year, Mother Sparsh Baby Care Private 
Limited (Mother Sparsh) became an associate of  
your Company pursuant to additional investment of 
` 13.46 crores through acquisition of Compulsorily 
Convertible Preference Shares on 27th October, 2022 
thereby increasing your Company’s stake to 22% 
(previous year 16%) on a fully diluted basis.  
Your Company’s investment in Mother Sparsh stood 
at ` 33.46 crores as at 31st March, 2023.
Mother Sparsh is a premium ayurvedic and natural 
personal care brand in the D2C space with focus 
on the mother and baby care segment. It has a 
wide range of baby and mother care products that 
leverages the wisdom and knowledge of Ayurveda.
Associates of Russell Credit Limited
Russell Investments Limited
During the year, the company recorded Total Income 
of ` 3.55 crores (previous year ` 2.83 crores) and Net 
Profit of ` 2.52 crores (previous year ` 3.38 crores). 
Total Comprehensive Income for the year stood at  
` 18.59 crores (previous year ` 15.51 crores) 
reflecting higher mark-to-market gains from long  
term investments. The company declared interim  
dividend of ` 0.70 per Equity Share of ` 10 each, 
aggregating ` 1.18 crores (previous year final dividend 
of ` 0.50 per Equity Share of ` 10 each, aggregating 
` 0.84 crore). The company continues to explore 
opportunities for strategic investments.
Divya Management Limited
During the year, the company recorded Total Income 
of ` 0.74 crore (previous year ` 0.40 crore) and Net 
Profit of ` 0.42 crore (previous year ` 0.28 crore). 
The company continues to explore opportunities for 
strategic investments.
Antrang Finance Limited
During the year, the company recorded Total Income 
of ` 0.54 crore (previous year ` 0.22 crore) and Net 
Profit of ` 0.32 crore (previous year ` 0.05 crore). 
The company continues to explore opportunities for 
strategic investments.
Report of the Board of Directors
90
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

INTERNAL FINANCIAL CONTROLS
The Corporate Governance Policy guides the conduct 
of affairs of your Company and clearly delineates 
the roles, responsibilities and authorities at each 
level of its three-tiered governance structure and 
key functionaries involved in governance. The ITC 
Code of Conduct commits management to financial 
and accounting policies, systems and processes. 
The Corporate Governance Policy and the ITC Code 
of Conduct stand widely communicated across the 
enterprise at all times and together with the Strategy 
of Organisation, Planning & Review Processes 
and the Risk Management Framework provide 
the foundation for Internal Financial Controls with 
reference to your Company’s Financial Statements.
Such Financial Statements are prepared on the 
basis of the Significant Accounting Policies that are 
carefully selected by management and approved by 
the Audit Committee and the Board. These Policies 
are supported by the Corporate Accounting and 
Systems Policies that apply to the entity as a whole 
to implement the tenets of Corporate Governance 
and Significant Accounting Policies uniformly across 
your Company. The Accounting Policies are reviewed 
and updated from time to time. These, in turn, are 
supported by a set of Divisional policies and Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) that have been 
established for individual Businesses.
Your Company uses Enterprise Resource Planning 
(ERP) systems as a business enabler and also 
to maintain its books of accounts. The SOPs, in 
tandem with transactional controls built into the ERP 
systems, ensure appropriate segregation of duties, 
tiered approval mechanisms and maintenance of 
supporting records. The Information Management 
Policy reinforces the control environment. The 
systems, SOPs and controls are reviewed by 
Divisional management and audited by Internal Audit, 
whose findings and recommendations are reviewed 
by the Audit Committee and tracked through till 
implementation.
Your Company has in place adequate internal 
financial controls with reference to the Financial 
Statements. These have been designed to provide 
reasonable assurance with regard to recording and 
providing reliable financial information; complying 
with applicable statutes; safeguarding assets from 
unauthorised use; ensuring that transactions are 
carried out with adequate authorisation and complying 
with Corporate Policies and Processes. Such controls 
have been assessed during the year, after taking into 
consideration the essential components of internal 
controls stated in the Guidance Note on Audit of 
Internal Financial Controls over Financial Reporting 
issued by The Institute of Chartered Accountants 
of India. Based on the results of such assessment 
carried out by management, no reportable material 
weakness or significant deficiency in the design or 
operation of internal financial controls was observed. 
Nonetheless, your Company recognises that any 
internal control framework, no matter how well 
designed, has inherent limitations and accordingly, 
regular audit and review processes ensure that such 
systems are reinforced on an ongoing basis.
RISK MANAGEMENT
As a diversified enterprise, your Company continues 
to focus on a system-based approach to business 
risk management. The management of risk is 
embedded in the corporate strategies of developing 
a portfolio of world-class businesses that best 
match organisational capability with opportunities 
in domestic and international markets, developing 
capabilities and competencies for the future in order 
to enhance competitiveness and win in the markets 
of tomorrow. Accordingly, management of risk has 
always been an integral part of your Company’s 
‘Strategy of Organisation’ and straddles its planning, 
execution and reporting processes & systems. Backed 
by strong internal control systems, the current Risk 
Management Framework consists of the following 
key elements: 
–	 The Corporate Governance Policy, approved 
by the Board, clearly lays down the roles 
and responsibilities of the various entities in 
relation to risk management covering a range 
of responsibilities, from the strategic to the 
operational. These role definitions, inter alia,  
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
91
ITC Limited

provide the foundation for appropriate risk 
management procedures, their effective 
implementation across your Company and 
independent monitoring and reporting by  
Internal Audit. 
–	 The Risk Management Committee, constituted by 
the Board, monitors and reviews the strategic risk 
management plans of your Company as a whole 
and provides necessary directions on the same. 
–	 The Corporate Risk Management Cell, through 
focused interactions with Businesses, facilitates 
the identification and prioritisation of strategic and 
operational risks, development of appropriate 
mitigation strategies and conducts periodic 
reviews of the progress on the management of 
identified risks.
–	 A combination of centrally issued policies and 
Divisionally-evolved procedures brings robustness 
to the process of ensuring that business risks are 
effectively addressed.
–	 Appropriate structures are in place to proactively 
monitor and manage the inherent risks in 
businesses with unique/relatively high risk profiles. 
–	 Foreign currency exposures continue to be 
managed within the framework of the Forex 
Manual. 
–	 A strong and independent Internal Audit function at 
the Corporate level carries out risk focused audits 
across all Businesses, enabling identification of 
areas where risk management processes may 
need to be strengthened. The Audit Committee 
of the Board reviews Internal Audit findings and 
provides strategic guidance on internal controls. 
The Audit Compliance Review Committee closely 
monitors the internal control environment within 
your Company including implementation of the 
action plans emerging out of internal audit findings. 
–	 At the Business level, Divisional Auditors 
continuously verify compliance with laid down 
policies and procedures and help plug control 
gaps by assisting operating management in the 
formulation of control procedures.
–	 A robust and comprehensive framework of 
strategic planning and performance management 
ensures realisation of business objectives based 
on effective strategy implementation. The annual 
planning exercise requires all Businesses to clearly 
identify their top risks and set out a mitigation 
plan with agreed timelines and accountabilities. 
Businesses are required to confirm periodically that 
all relevant risks have been identified, assessed, 
evaluated and that appropriate mitigation systems 
have been implemented. 
Your Company endeavours to continuously sharpen its 
Risk Management systems and processes in line with a 
rapidly changing business environment. In this regard, 
it is pertinent to note that some of the key Businesses 
of your Company have adopted the ISO 31000 Risk 
Management Standard and accordingly, the Risk 
Management systems and processes prevalent in 
these Businesses have been independently assessed 
to be compliant with the said global Standard on Risk 
Management. During the year, three Businesses 
were assessed for compliance with ISO 31000 Risk 
Management Standard. This is in addition to the nine 
Businesses which had previously been assessed for 
such compliance. The centrally anchored initiative 
of conducting independent external reviews of key 
business processes with high ‘value at risk’ continued 
during the year. These interventions continue to 
provide further assurance on the robustness of risk 
management practices prevalent in your Company. 
Recognising Digital as a megatrend shaping the future, 
your Company remains focused on building a dynamic 
‘Future-Tech’ enterprise powered by state-of-the-art 
digital technologies and infrastructure across the value 
chain adding significant impetus to digital marketing, 
digital commerce and digital operations. Your Company 
has made several interventions straddling strategic 
impact areas such as Intelligent new-age insights that 
reimagine Consumer Experience, Business Model 
Transformation, Smart Operations and Employee 
Experience, which continue to be scaled up across 
your Company. Cutting-edge digital technologies 
such as Internet of Things (IoT), Data Analytics, 
Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning, Augmented/
Report of the Board of Directors
92
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

Virtual Reality, Robotic Process Automation, mobile 
applications etc., are being embraced by your 
Company’s Businesses. Cumulatively, these are 
resulting in changes in the risk profile of your Company 
in a heightened cyber threat environment. The  
ever-evolving nature of cyber threats and the increased 
sophistication of attackers make cyber security risk 
management a critical focus area for the organisation.
A Cyber Security Committee, chaired by the Chief 
Information Officer, is in place to provide specific 
focus on cyber security related risks, with the primary 
responsibility of tracking emerging practices & 
technologies and providing suitable recommendations 
for enhancing security of the IT systems and 
infrastructure.
A multi-tier cyber defence architecture comprising 
firewalls, anti-virus and anti-malware systems is in 
place to detect, protect and respond to cyber incidents 
at various access and data processing points across 
the organisation. The security policies and practices 
of the organisation are built on industry standard 
frameworks such as NIST Cyber Security Framework 
and ISO 27001. The robustness of the security 
posture is also premised on end user awareness of 
safe and secure practices.
Further interventions are underway to enhance 
surveillance and response capabilities with 
augmentation of cutting-edge technologies and skills of 
a Next Generation Cyber Security Operations Centre 
(SOC). With progressive transitioning of mission-critical 
data and transaction processing workloads to the 
Cloud, the network infrastructure of the organisation is 
also being transformed using contemporary network 
and security technologies into a Digital-Ready,  
Cloud-Secure wide area network, to provide all 
authorised users fast, reliable and safe connections 
from anywhere through any device and at any time.
During the year, a maturity assessment of the Cyber 
Security architecture of your Company was carried out 
by a global network and security solutions provider. 
As per the study, your Company’s Cyber Security 
Systems and Processes are benchmarked to global 
majors and outperformed local peers. 
Information Technology-Operational Technology  
(IT-OT) integration for Industrial Control Systems has 
been identified as a focus area as the convergence 
and integration between IT and OT is increasing 
exponentially. Related guidelines have been 
formulated towards ensuring that your Company’s 
systems & processes remain contemporary and have 
best-in-class capabilities.
India ranks amongst the most vulnerable countries 
around the world in terms of climate change impact. 
Accordingly, to mitigate the impact of climate 
change on the operations of your Company, as part 
of its Sustainability 2.0 vision, your Company is 
pursuing a multi-pronged climate strategy that entails 
extensive decarbonisation and building resilience 
against climate risk across the value chain. Your 
Company’s low carbon growth approach focuses on 
increasing the share of renewable energy, improving 
energy productivity, construction of green buildings, 
greening logistics, optimising ‘distance-to-market’ and 
promoting regenerative agriculture practices in  
agri-value chains, thus enabling transition to a net 
zero economy. At the same time, your Company 
is actively working towards climate proofing its 
operations and agri-value chains by using latest 
climate risk modelling techniques, and developing 
site-specific adaptation strategies.
Your Company sources several commodities for 
use as inputs in its Businesses and also engages in 
agri-commodity trading as part of its Agri Business. 
In respect of commodities sourced for use as inputs 
in its Businesses, your Company has well laid out 
policies to manage risks arising out of the inherent 
price volatility associated with such commodities. 
This includes robust mechanisms for monitoring 
market dynamics towards making informed sourcing 
decisions, well defined inventory holding norms 
based on considerations such as seasonality and 
the strategic nature of the commodity concerned, 
long-term contracts with suppliers and continuously 
diversify supplier base to secure supply of critical 
items at competitive costs. Multiple sourcing models, 
wide geographical spread, extensive sourcing and 
supply chain network and associated infrastructure  
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
93
ITC Limited

in key growing areas coupled with deep-rooted  
farmer linkages ensure sourcing of high quality  
agri-commodities at competitive costs.
In respect of Agri-commodity trading, your Company 
has a well laid out policy to manage risks associated 
with sourcing of such commodities. This includes:
–	 segregation of duties and robust internal controls 
through a system of checks and balances embedded 
in the organisation and governance structure;
–	 clearly defined limits for trading position (long and 
short) and net cash loss for specific commodities/
commodity groups;
–	 mitigation of price, liquidity and counter party 
risks through hedging on commodity exchanges 
(mainly NCDEX) for certain commodities, as 
applicable. Correlation between prices prevailing 
in the physical market and those on the commodity 
exchange is analysed regularly to ensure 
effectiveness of hedging; 
–	 robust monitoring and review mechanisms of net 
open positions and ‘value at risk’.
The combination of policies and processes as  
outlined above adequately addresses the various  
risks associated with sourcing of commodities for  
your Company’s Businesses.
Your Company’s strategy of backward integration in 
sourcing of agri-commodities such as wheat, potato, 
fruit pulp, spices, milk and leaf tobacco; in-house 
manufacturing of paperboards, paper and packaging 
(including pulp production and print cylinder making 
facilities); wood procurement from the economic 
vicinity of the Bhadrachalam unit, facilitates access to 
critical inputs at benchmark quality and competitive 
cost besides ensuring security of supplies. Further, 
each of your Company’s Businesses continuously 
focuses on product mix enrichment and yield 
improvement towards protecting margins and 
insulating operations from spikes in input prices. 
The Risk Management Committee met thrice during the 
year and was updated on the status and effectiveness 
of the risk management plans. The Audit Committee 
was also updated on the effectiveness of your 
Company’s Risk Management systems and policies. 
The risk management practices of your Company, 
as reviewed through the Risk Management Cell 
and Internal Audit processes, have been found to 
be relevant and commensurate with the size and 
complexity of its operations. 
AUDIT AND SYSTEMS
Your Company believes that strong internal control 
systems that are commensurate with the scale, scope 
and complexity of its operations are concomitant 
to the principle of governance that freedom of 
management should be exercised within a framework 
of appropriate checks and balances.
Your Company remains committed to ensuring a 
mature and effective internal control environment that, 
inter alia, provides assurance on orderly and efficient 
conduct of operations, security of assets, prevention 
and detection of frauds/errors, accuracy and 
completeness of accounting records and Management 
Information Systems, timely preparation of reliable 
financial information, adherence with relevant statutes 
and compliance with related party transactions.
Your Company’s internal control systems include 
documented policies and procedures, segregation 
of duties and careful selection and development 
of employees.
Your Company’s independent and robust Internal 
Audit processes, both at the Business and Corporate 
level, provide assurance on the adequacy and 
effectiveness of internal controls, compliance with 
operating systems, internal policies and regulatory 
requirements. The role of Internal Audit is to enhance 
and protect organisational value by providing  
risk-based assurance, advice and insight while 
enabling continuous improvement of your Company’s 
control systems. 
The Internal Audit function, consisting of 
professionally qualified accountants, engineers and 
Information Technology (IT) specialists, is adequately 
skilled and resourced to deliver audit assurances at 
highest levels. Targeted Learning and Development 
Report of the Board of Directors
94
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

programmes on contemporary topics are periodically 
organised to enhance knowledge and skill sets.
In the context of your Company’s IT environment, 
systems and policies relating to Information 
Management are periodically reviewed and 
benchmarked for contemporariness. Compliance 
with the Information Management policies receives 
focused attention of the Internal Audit function. 
With the increased importance of information security, 
cyber security and adoption of emerging technologies, 
focused reviews are carried out for IT applications  
and processes across Businesses. These primarily 
focus on assessment of controls pertaining to 
confidentiality, integrity and availability of business 
information and systems covering General IT Controls 
and security of your Company’s IT Infrastructure. 
All critical Business-led Information Technology 
systems undergo pre-implementation audit before 
being deployed in the operating environment, thereby 
delivering assurance with respect to the rigour of 
implementation and operational readiness of the 
proposed systems. 
The scope and coverage of Internal Audit continues 
to remain contemporary and includes, inter alia, 
assessment of emerging risks in the social media 
ecosystem, cloud infrastructure, robotic process 
automation, information technology-operational 
technology (IT-OT) integration and protection of 
sensitive personal data and information.
Qualified engineers in the Internal Audit function 
review the quality of design, planning and execution of 
all ongoing projects involving significant expenditure 
to ensure that project management controls are 
adequate and yield ‘value for money’. Internal Audit 
continues to use state-of-the-art tools and software for 
conducting project audits.
Your Company’s Internal Audit function has 
implemented a ‘hybrid’ audit approach, involving a 
combination of onsite and offsite audits, to further 
enhance productivity and optimise costs. Processes 
in the Internal Audit function are continuously 
strengthened for enhanced effectiveness and 
productivity including the deployment of contemporary 
best-in-class tools for audit analytics. 
Your Company’s Internal Audit processes are certified 
as complying with ISO 9001:2015 Quality Standards. 
Further, systems and processes are in accordance 
with the Standards on Internal Audit (SIA) issued by 
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India. 
The Audit Committee of your Board met seven times 
during the year. The Terms of Reference of the 
Audit Committee, inter alia, include reviewing the 
effectiveness of the internal control environment, 
evaluation of your Company’s internal financial 
controls, and risk management systems, monitoring 
implementation of the action plans emerging out of 
review of significant Internal Audit findings including 
those relating to strengthening of your Company’s risk 
management systems and discharging of statutory 
mandates. Material observations (as defined in Terms 
of Reference) are reviewed at the highest level by the 
Audit Compliance and Review Committee (ACRC) 
and the Audit Committee.
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
The talent management strategy of your Company 
focuses on sustaining ITC’s position as one of India’s 
most valuable corporations, remaining customer-centric, 
nimble and performance driven whilst continuing with 
its mission of building a responsible ‘Future-Tech’ 
enterprise. Your Company’s thought, strategy and 
action are inspired by a larger purpose of being an 
exemplary Indian enterprise that not only pursues 
agile innovation for competitive advantage, but also 
embeds sustainability and inclusiveness at the  
core of its Businesses. This approach has enabled it 
to create enduring value for the Indian economy and 
the larger community of stakeholders, while  
delighting consumers with a vibrant portfolio of  
best-in-class products and services. Your Company’s 
employees relentlessly strive to deliver world-class 
performance, foster team spirit and discharge their 
role as ‘trustees’ of all stakeholders. Your Company is 
committed to perpetuating this vitality – its growth as 
a value generating engine and also as an exemplary 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
95
ITC Limited

institution – so that it continues to succeed in its 
relentless pursuit of creating enduring value.
Your Company’s Human Resources development 
approach spans four key organisational dimensions of 
Agility, Alignment, Ability and Architecture which are  
supported through strategies crafted in areas of impact  
such as talent acquisition, engagement, diversity & 
inclusion, capability building, employee relations, 
performance & rewards and employee well-being.  
The initiatives and processes of your Company 
strive to deliver the unique talent promise of Building 
Winning Businesses, Building Business Leaders  
and Creating Value for India. The talent development 
practices help create, foster and strengthen the 
capability of human capital to deliver critical outcomes 
on the vectors of strategic impact, operational 
efficiency and capital productivity while reimagining 
consumer experience, driving business model 
transformation and enhancing employee experience. 
Your Company’s ‘Strategy of Organisation’ is 
designed to promote agility through a culture and 
practice of distributed leadership enabled by a  
three-tier governance structure. This is manifested 
in market and consumer facing Businesses, which 
are driven by empowered, cluster-based teams 
and supported by shared assets and capabilities, 
enabling strategic relevance, speed, responsiveness, 
and operational excellence. This approach allows 
Businesses, through their Management Committees, 
to focus, develop and execute Business Plans 
relevant to their product-market spaces while 
leveraging the institutional strengths of your Company 
and harvesting internal synergies. 
While the year under review witnessed recovery from  
the pandemic, geopolitical developments and volatility 
in the macro-economic environment impacted the 
overall talent market. Workforce readjustment, 
moderation of start-up opportunities, flexible work 
configurations, increased female participation in the 
workforce and a growing focus on reskilling were 
some of the year’s defining developments. Industry 
attrition levels, which witnessed significant increase 
during the year, are expected to soften with global 
technology companies rationalising their workforce 
and global entities experiencing growth challenges 
in certain primary markets. Your Company’s unique 
employer equity as an exemplary Indian enterprise 
creating world-class brands, building business leaders 
and generating economic, social and environmental 
capital for the Indian economy, continues to play a  
vital role in the attraction and retention of high-quality  
talent. The management trainee programme, 
augmented with recruitment of experienced talent 
from the market, is an integral part of the leadership 
pipeline development process. Your Company 
continues to draw the finest management, technical 
and commercial talent from premier institutions 
in the country and is ranked amongst the leading 
companies in these institutions. Intensive engagement 
with the country’s premier academic institutions 
over the years to communicate your Company’s 
talent proposition through case-study competitions, 
knowledge-sharing programmes by senior managers 
and the annual internship programmes have all 
contributed to creating a compelling proposition for 
the best candidates to aspire for a career with your 
Company. Your Company continues to enthuse talent 
with high-impact roles, competitive and performance 
driven remuneration with an emphasis on long-term 
incentives, a wealth of learning opportunities, a 
commitment to enhancing diversity, equity & inclusion, 
an employee-centric climate, well-being focused 
infrastructure and support that promotes fellowship 
and commitment amongst employees. 
Your Company’s talent development approach 
is founded on the belief that learning initiatives 
must remain synergistic and aligned to business 
outcomes. Towards this end, your Company has 
built a culture of continuous learning, innovation and 
collaboration. Your Company provides managers 
with contemporary and relevant learning and 
development support through a combination of 
classroom programmes, on-the-job assignments, 
self-paced e-learning modules and application projects 
with emphasis on experiential learning and exposure 
to nationally and globally renowned faculty. Deep 
functional expertise is fostered early in one’s career  
through immersion in complex problem-solving 
Report of the Board of Directors
96
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

assignments requiring the application of domain 
expertise. Managers are assessed on your 
Company’s behavioural competency framework and 
provided with learning and development support to 
address areas identified for improvement. Key talent 
is provided critical experiences in high-impact roles 
and mentored by senior managers, promoting the 
development of a steady pool of high-quality talent. 
Your Company has identified three capability  
platforms relevant to making Businesses future-ready – 
Business Critical Strategic Competencies, Leadership 
Development and Organisation Identity & Pride. 
Capability needs, vitally significant to competitive 
performance, are identified for talent cohorts across 
domains. These include Marketing Strategy,  
Data Science and Analytics, Marketing in a Digital 
world, Business Strategy and Commercial Acumen. 
Globally benchmarked curriculums are designed 
in these domains, delivered through internationally 
renowned faculty and supplemented with  
business-critical application projects. Similarly,  
as a part of leadership development initiatives,  
the Reflections 360 programme comprising feedback 
from team members, peers and managers enables 
personal development of employees. This approach, 
collectively ensures relevance and impact, thereby 
enhancing the capability index of your Company’s 
human capital. Periodic induction programmes, 
anchored by senior leaders, are conducted to 
enable new entrants to appreciate your Company’s 
Vision, Mission, Culture, Values and Strategies while 
fostering pride in affiliation with your Company. 
Your Company continues to strengthen its 
performance management system and its culture of 
accountability through the widespread adoption of the 
system of Management-by-Objectives. Performance 
planning through clearly defined goals, outcome-based 
assessment, and alignment of rewards for 
achievement of results have all contributed to a  
robust culture of ownership and accountability.  
‘Career Conversations’ and succession planning 
processes have contributed to helping employees 
realise their potential, craft their careers while 
recognising their strengths and areas of development 
and ensuring a sound workforce planning system.
In the spirit of continuous improvement, your 
Company maintains a practice of periodically 
assessing employee engagement through a 
Company-wide survey. The recent survey in 2022 
affirms high levels of employee engagement and 
reflects significant consolidation of gains achieved 
over recent years. The employee engagement, 
managerial effectiveness and performance 
enablement indices have all improved, ranging from  
7 to 12 percentage points since the survey’s inception 
in 2016. Employees have expressed overwhelming 
appreciation on several dimensions with over 90% 
of employees reporting a deep sense of pride, belief 
in your Company’s overarching goals & leadership 
and optimism for the future. These sentiments are 
reflected in your Company’s superior standing  
in terms of voluntary attrition across Businesses.  
During the year, a range of engagement 
programmes were undertaken including initiatives 
such as leadership outreach through extensive 
communication, recognition programmes 
acknowledging exceptional contributions of employees 
and teams, career conversations and development 
planning for robust positioning and progression 
decisions and investments in employee wellbeing. 
The year witnessed the Hotels Business winning  
the W.E. Global Employees Choice Award 2022  
by W.E.-Matter involving participation of  
appx. 1000 managers. 
Your Company’s efforts to enhance Diversity,  
Equity and Inclusion are founded on the conviction 
that a diverse workforce contributes to rich discourse, 
promotes holistic perspectives, fosters creative 
solutions and is integral to serving customers  
better while creating value for all stakeholders.  
Your Company’s policy on Diversity, Equity and 
Inclusion articulates and institutionalises this 
conviction. Your Company is committed to  
enhancing gender diversity and participation of the 
differently-abled in the workforce. Such concerted 
actions span three vectors, namely:
–	 Representation
–	 Inclusion & Enablement
–	 Commitment and Assurance
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
97
ITC Limited

Measures to enhance diversity include ensuring 
sufficient representation of women in selection 
pools and deployment of the differently-abled 
across suitable opportunities in the value chain. 
Through progressive policies offering flexible work 
arrangements, extended child-care leave, travel 
support for infants and care-givers, secure transport, 
paternity leave, same gender partner medical 
benefits, infrastructure support coupled with various 
sensitisation programmes, Employee Resource 
Groups, development interventions tailored for 
women talent, and the commitment and sponsorship 
of leaders; your Company provides an enabling 
environment to further its Diversity, Equity and 
Inclusion goals. To ensure a safe and progressive 
work environment, Internal Complaints Committees 
have been institutionalised as per provisions of 
the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013. 
Your Company continued its practice of active 
leadership outreach to employees. Periodic 
communication with the ITC community through 
‘StudioOne Townhalls’ led by the Chairman, provided 
employees avenues to hear from and engage with 
leaders about your Company’s vision, strategy and 
milestones. This was supplemented by a more 
personalised engagement through the ‘StudioOne 
Xchange’ initiative. The Chairman and other members 
of the Corporate Management Committee interacted 
with managers across Businesses in small groups, 
sharing your Company’s vision and strategies 
while also inviting suggestions and feedback. Your 
Company believes that alignment of all employees 
to a shared vision and purpose is vital for winning in 
the marketplace. It also recognises the mutuality of 
interests with key stakeholders and is committed to 
continue building harmonious employee relations. 
Your Company remains dedicated to an Employee 
Relations climate of partnership and mutuality while 
ensuring operations are competitive, flexible and 
responsive. The Employee Relations philosophy of 
your Company, anchored in the tenets of Scientific 
Management, Industrial Democracy, Human Relations 
and Employee Well-being, has contributed towards 
building a robust platform which has aided the 
conclusion of collective bargaining agreements at 
several of its manufacturing units and hotel properties, 
ensuring smooth commencement of operations at 
greenfield locations and the execution of productivity 
improvement practices.
WHISTLEBLOWER POLICY 
Your Company’s Whistleblower Policy encourages 
Directors and employees to bring to your Company’s 
attention, instances of illegal or unethical conduct, 
actual or suspected incidents of fraud, actions that 
affect the financial integrity of your Company, or actual 
or suspected instances of leak of unpublished price 
sensitive information that could adversely impact your 
Company’s operations, business performance and/
or reputation. The Policy requires your Company 
to investigate such incidents, when reported, in an 
impartial manner and take appropriate action to 
ensure that the requisite standards of professional 
and ethical conduct are always upheld. Anonymous 
complaints are also entertained if the complaint 
sets out specific allegations & verifiable facts, and 
is accompanied with supporting evidence. It is your 
Company’s Policy to ensure that no complainant is 
victimised or harassed for bringing such incidents 
to the attention of your Company, and to keep 
the information disclosed during the course of 
the investigation as confidential. The practice of 
the Whistleblower Policy is overseen by the Audit 
Committee and no employee was denied access to the 
Committee during the year. The Whistleblower Policy 
is available on your Company’s corporate website  
at https://www.itcportal.com/whistleblower-policy . 
SUSTAINABILITY 2.0 
Your Company believes that when enterprises 
make societal value creation an integral part of their 
corporate strategy, powerful drivers of innovation 
emerge that make growth more enduring for all 
stakeholders. This paradigm is called ‘Responsible 
Competitiveness’ - an abiding strategy that focuses 
on extreme competitiveness but in a manner 
that replenishes the environment and supports 
sustainable livelihoods. 
Report of the Board of Directors
98
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

Your Company’s innovative business models 
synergise the building of economic, environmental 
and social capital, thus embedding sustainability 
at the core of its corporate strategy. Today, this 
strategy has not only contributed to building strong 
businesses of the future as well as a portfolio of 
winning world-class brands, but also in making your 
Company a global exemplar in ‘Triple Bottom Line’ 
performance. Your Company is the only enterprise 
in the world of comparable dimensions to have 
achieved and sustained the three key global indices of 
environmental sustainability of being ‘water positive’ 
(for 21 years), ‘carbon positive’ (for 18 years), 
and ‘solid waste recycling positive’ (for 16 years). 
This approach has enabled your Company and its 
businesses to support sustainable livelihoods for more 
than six million people. 
Your Company is actively working towards 
Sustainability 2.0, an agenda which reimagines 
sustainability under the pressing challenges of 
climate change and social inequity. Sustainability 2.0 
calls for inclusive strategies that can support 
sustainable livelihoods, pursue newer ways to fight 
climate change, enable the transition to a net zero 
economy, work towards ensuring water security  
for all and create an effective circular economy for  
post-consumer packaging waste. It also entails 
protecting and restoring biodiversity and ecosystem 
services through adoption of nature-based solutions. 
Your Company believes that agility in thought and 
action, meaningful public-private-people  
partnerships and Responsible Competitiveness  
will act as core enablers of this new agenda.  
Your Company has the potential to make a large-
scale impact not only from an economic standpoint,  
but also from an employment generation and social 
enablement lens because of its presence across 
several critical sectors of the economy. With its bold 
Sustainability 2.0 agenda, your Company is setting 
the bar higher and remains committed to making 
meaningful contribution to the Nation’s future while 
retaining its status as a sustainability exemplar.  
The Sustainability 2.0 ambitions include:
Climate Change
–	 Enhancing the share of renewable energy usage to 
50% of total energy consumption by 2030.
–	 Meeting 100% of purchased grid electricity 
requirements from renewable sources by 2030.
–	 Reducing specific energy consumption by 30% 
and specific GHG emissions by 50% by 2030 as 
compared to the FY 2018-19 baseline.
–	 Sustain and enhance carbon sequestration 
by expanding forestry projects on wastelands 
through your Company’s Social and Farm Forestry 
programme and other such initiatives covering  
over 15 lakh acres by 2030. 
Water Stewardship
–	 Achieving 40% reduction in specific water 
consumption by 2030 as compared to the  
FY 2018-19 baseline.
–	 Creation of rainwater harvesting potential 
equivalent to over 5 times the net water 
consumption by 2030.
–	 Certification of all sites in high water stressed 
areas as per the international water stewardship 
standard by Alliance for Water Stewardship (AWS) 
by 2035. 
–	 Improve crop water-use efficiency in agri-value 
chains through demand side management 
interventions and enable savings of 2000 million kl 
of water by 2030.
Plastic Waste and Circular Economy
–	 100% of your Company’s Packaging to be 
Reusable, Recyclable or Compostable/
Biodegradable by 2028.
Sustainable Agriculture
–	 Promote climate smart village approach in core 
Agri Business catchments covering over 3 million 
acres by 2030.
Biodiversity Conservation
–	 Revive & sustain ecosystem services and  
products provided by nature, through adoption 
of nature-based solutions and biodiversity 
conservation covering over 1 million acres by 2030.
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
99
ITC Limited

Sustainable Livelihoods
–	 Supporting sustainable livelihoods for 10 million 
people by 2030.
Your Company’s Businesses are actively working 
towards achieving your Company’s Sustainability 
2.0 vision. During the year, around 43% of your 
Company’s total energy requirements were met 
from renewable sources. Commendable progress 
has been made in line with 2030 targets relating to 
specific energy, specific GHG emissions and specific 
water consumption across Businesses. In line with 
its commitment, your Company continued to remain 
plastic neutral during FY 2022-23 by sustainably 
managing more plastic packaging waste than the 
amount of plastic packaging utilised. During the 
year, your Company’s large-scale programmes on 
Sustainable Agriculture were augmented to cover 
2.3 million acres. A detailed performance dashboard 
against 2030 commitments is available in your 
Company’s Sustainability Report, 2023.
To achieve its Sustainability 2.0 vision, your 
Company continues to strengthen its management 
approach which is guided by a comprehensive set 
of sustainability policies and is being implemented 
across the organisation. Your Company is also 
strengthening the mechanisms of engagement 
with key stakeholders, identification of material 
sustainability issues and progressively monitoring 
and mitigating the impacts along the value chain of 
each Business. Your Company will continue to update 
these systems and processes in line with evolving 
disclosure standards and Environmental, Social and 
Governance (ESG) requirements. 
Your Company’s 19th Sustainability Report published 
during the year detailed the progress made across all 
dimensions of the ‘Triple Bottom Line’ for FY 2021-22. 
This report was prepared in conformance with both 
the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) standards and 
International <IR> Framework published by Value 
Reporting Foundation. The report presents a range of 
financial and non-financial disclosures to illustrate how 
different ‘capitals’ are deployed to enable creation of 
enduring value. In addition, the report is prepared in 
line with ‘In Accordance – Comprehensive’ criteria 
of the GRI standards and is third-party assured to 
‘Reasonable Level’ as per International Standard on 
Assurance Engagements (ISAE) 3000. 
Your Company’s Sustainability Report for FY 2022-23 
is being prepared and will be made available on your 
Company’s corporate website in due course. 
In addition, the Business Responsibility & 
Sustainability Report (BRSR), as mandated by the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) for 
the year under review is annexed to the Report 
and Accounts. The BRSR maps the sustainability 
performance of your Company against the nine 
principles forming part of the National Guidelines on 
Responsible Business Conduct (NGRBC) issued by 
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Government of India. 
During the year, your Company sustained its ‘AA’ 
rating by MSCI-ESG for the fifth consecutive year, 
the highest rating among global tobacco majors, 
and has also been included in the Dow Jones 
Sustainability Emerging Markets Index for the third 
year in a row. Additionally, your Company was rated 
‘A-’ at Leadership Level for both Climate Change and 
Water Security by CDP, which is above the Asia and 
Global average of ‘C’ for climate change and ‘B’ for 
water security.
Contribution to the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals (UN SDGs) 
Your Company’s Sustainability strategies and Social 
Investment Programmes & interventions, in addition 
to their alignment with national priorities, are also well 
positioned to contribute to the achievement of India’s 
commitment under the UN SDGs. For instance, your 
Company’s programme on Climate Smart Agriculture 
is aligned to the Government’s National Mission for 
Sustainable Agriculture, and also contributes  
to the achievement of multiple SDGs, including  
SDG 13 (Climate Action), SDG 15 (Life on Land), 
SDG 1 (No Poverty) and SDG 2 (Zero Hunger).  
A comprehensive statement linking your Company’s 
interventions to the SDGs including corresponding 
targets will be available in your Company’s 
Sustainability Report for FY 2022-23.
Report of the Board of Directors
100
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

Building Climate Resilience
Your Company recognises the urgent need to combat 
climate change for building a more secure future and 
the role it can play in enabling a net-zero economy. 
To address the risks of climate change, your 
Company is pursuing a low carbon growth strategy 
through extensive decarbonisation programmes 
across its value chain. These include increasing the 
share of renewable energy, continuous reduction 
of specific energy, construction of green buildings, 
greening logistics & optimising distance-to-market, 
and promoting regenerative agriculture practices in 
agri-value chains. Your Company is also conducting 
life-cycle analysis (LCA) studies for developing a 
portfolio of innovative and sustainable products in 
line with growing consumer preference for climate 
friendly products. 
Additionally, in order to identify long-term physical 
risks of climate change, your Company is working with 
climate experts to conduct comprehensive climate 
risk and vulnerability assessments using climate 
models across its operating locations (factories, hotels 
and warehouses). These assessments consider 
impact of climate hazards related to changes in 
temperature, precipitation, sea level rise, flooding 
and other extreme weather events over different time 
frames under various Representative Concentration 
Pathways (RCP)/Shared Socioeconomic Pathways 
(SSPs) scenarios. Based on the findings of these 
assessments, detailed site-specific studies are 
undertaken for developing contextual location-specific 
adaptation plans and strategies.
Similarly, factors such as rise in extreme weather 
events, varying climatic parameters and dependence 
on rainwater for irrigation make agriculture in India 
quite vulnerable to climate change. For major crops 
like wheat, pulp-wood and leaf tobacco among others, 
there is significant and sustained work being done by 
your Company on the development of climate-tolerant 
varieties as well as dissemination of climate-resilient and 
regenerative agronomic practices in the growing areas. 
Detailed farm-level studies have also been conducted 
to understand the potential adverse impacts of 
climate change on your Company’s key agri-value 
chains. These risk assessments help further calibrate 
the climate resilience measures that are being 
implemented across your Company’s value chains.
Energy Conservation and Renewable Energy
As a responsible corporate citizen, your Company has 
made a commitment to reduce dependence on energy 
from fossil fuels. Accordingly, all factories incorporate 
appropriate green features and premium luxury hotels 
and office complexes continue to be certified at the 
highest level by either the USGBC or Indian Green 
Building Council (IGBC). During the year, around  
43% (previous year: 42%) of your Company’s total 
energy requirements were met from renewable 
sources such as biomass, wind and solar. As on date, 
your Company has installed and commissioned  
178 MW of renewable energy capacity in the form of 
solar and wind power across the country. Additionally, 
your Company’s Paperboards & Specialty Papers 
Business commissioned a state-of-the-art and 
future-ready High Pressure Recovery Boiler at the 
Bhadrachalam mill, replacing conventional soda 
recovery boilers, which will contribute towards reducing 
carbon footprint through lower coal consumption. 
Your Company is well positioned to benefit from 
energy conservation and renewable energy promotion 
schemes such as Perform, Achieve and Trade (PAT) 
and Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs) promoted 
by the Government of India. Your Company continues 
its efforts towards meeting 100% of purchased grid 
electricity requirements from renewable sources, 
and achieving 50% renewable energy share in 
its total energy consumption by 2030 based on a 
mix of energy conservation and renewable energy 
investments, despite significant enhancement in its 
scale of operations going forward.
Greenhouse Gases (GHG) and Carbon Sequestration
The GHG inventory of your Company for FY 2022-23  
compiled according to the ISO 14064 Standard 
has been assured, as in the earlier years, at the 
‘Reasonable Level’ by an independent third party. 
The GHG inventory covers emissions from your 
Company’s operations and GHG removals from your 
Company’s large-scale forestry programmes.  
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023 101
ITC Limited

Your Company’s Social and Farm Forestry initiatives, 
besides sequestering carbon from the atmosphere, 
help towards greening of degraded wasteland, prevent 
soil erosion, enhance organic matter content in soil 
and increase ground water recharge.
Towards Water Security for All
With water scarcity increasingly becoming an area of 
global and national concern, your Company continues 
to focus on an integrated water management 
approach that includes water conservation and 
harvesting initiatives at its units – while at the same 
time working towards meeting the water security 
needs of all stakeholders at the local watershed 
level. Several interventions have been rolled out to 
improve water-use efficiencies such as adopting latest 
technologies and increasing reuse and recycling 
practices within the fence while also working with 
farmers and other community members towards 
improving water-use efficiencies. 
Demand side management is a critical component 
of your Company’s Water Stewardship programme. 
Recognising the critical imperative of reducing 
water use, especially in agriculture, your Company 
continues to work with farmers to achieve ‘more crop 
per drop’ and improve farmer incomes. Over 11.8 lakh 
acres have been covered till date across 12 states 
through micro irrigation technologies and crop-specific 
agronomical practices. Various studies indicate 
potential water savings to the tune of 780 million kl 
during the year.
The demand side measures are implemented along 
with augmenting supply at the sub-catchment level 
through various interventions focused on harvesting 
rainwater based on the recommendations of  
hydro-geological studies. The supply side 
interventions include enhancing capture and 
storage of rainwater (within soil surface and storage 
structures) and recharging aquifers. Your Company 
also conducts efficacy studies to assess the impact 
of the watershed work carried out, and to ensure that 
maximum benefits accrue in the long-term. As on  
31st March, 2023, your Company’s integrated 
watershed development projects covering over  
1.47 million acres of land have created a total 
rainwater harvesting potential (RWH) of 48.9 million kl. 
In total, nearly 50 million kl of rainwater has been 
harvested, including within the fence, which is over 
3 times the net water consumed by your Company’s 
operations in FY 2022-23. 
During the year, your Company’s Foods unit at Malur 
became the first foods processing facility in Asia to 
be awarded the AWS Platinum level certification, the 
highest recognition for water stewardship in the world. 
Your Company is in the process of implementing the 
AWS Standards at other units in high water stress 
areas and will progressively obtain AWS certification 
for these sites. 
Pioneering the Green Building Movement in India
In order to continuously reduce your Company’s 
energy footprint, green features are being integrated 
in all new and old constructions including hotels, 
manufacturing units, warehouses and office 
complexes. Your Company is a pioneer in the green 
building movement, with 40 buildings having received 
Platinum certification by USGBC/IGBC.
Several of your Company’s factories and office 
complexes have received the Green Building 
certification from IGBC and the Leadership in Energy 
& Environmental Design (LEED) certification from 
USGBC. In 2004, the ITC Green Centre at Gurugram 
received LEED Platinum certification by USGBC, 
making it the largest Platinum rated building in 
the world at that point in time. The data centre at 
Bengaluru, ITC Sankhya, is the first data centre in 
the world to receive the LEED Platinum certification 
by USGBC. Large infrastructure investments such as 
the ITC Green Centre at Guntur and the ITC Green 
Centre at Bengaluru (both LEED Platinum certified) 
continue to demonstrate your Company’s commitment 
to green buildings. Virginia House, Kolkata and ITC 
Centre, Kolkata – the headquarters of your Company, 
are also certified at the highest ‘LEED Platinum’ rated 
Green Building by USGBC. 
Reaffirming your Company’s commitment to the  
ethos of ‘Responsible Luxury’, all luxury collection 
hotels of your Company are LEED Platinum certified,  
Report of the Board of Directors
102
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

making your Company a trailblazer in green 
hoteliering globally. ITC Grand Chola, the 600-key 
super-premium luxury hotel complex in Chennai, is 
amongst the world’s largest LEED Platinum certified 
green hotels. 
In 2020, ITC Windsor’s best practices on carbon 
management distinguished it as the first hotel in 
the world to be LEED Zero Carbon certified. Since 
then, 11 additional ITC Hotels have been certified 
as LEED Zero Carbon. Further, your Company’s 
Sankhya data center in Bengaluru became the first 
data center in the world to be awarded the LEED Zero 
Carbon certification.
Enabling a Circular Economy 
Your Company continues to make significant  
progress in improving the circularity of waste 
generated in operations. The focus is on reducing 
waste through constant monitoring, improvement of 
efficiencies in material utilisation and adequate waste 
segregation improving recycling rates. During the 
year, your Company achieved over 99% recycling of 
waste generated in course of its operations.  
This has prevented waste from reaching landfills, 
with the associated problems of soil & groundwater 
contamination and GHG emissions, all of which  
can adversely impact public health. In addition, your 
Company’s Paperboards & Specialty Papers Business 
recycled nearly 84,000 tonnes of externally sourced 
post-consumer waste paper, thereby creating yet 
another positive environmental footprint.
Your Company aims to go beyond the requirements 
of Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2022 to ensure 
that over the next decade, 100% of packaging is 
reusable, recyclable or compostable/biodegradable. 
Your Company is working towards optimising 
packaging in a way that reduces the environmental 
impact arising out of post-consumer packaging waste 
without affecting product integrity. This is being 
addressed in a comprehensive manner by optimising 
packaging design, introducing recycled content in 
packaging, identifying alternative packaging material 
with lower environmental impact and supporting 
development of suitable end-of-life solutions for 
packaging waste. 
Your Company has successfully implemented multiple 
large-scale models of solid waste management  
across the country. These models, based on 
principles of circular economy, are scalable,  
replicable and sustainable, and have enabled your 
Company to sustain its plastic neutral status since 
FY 2021-22. The approach is centred around treating 
waste as a resource and ensuring that minimal waste 
goes to landfill, which can be achieved only when 
waste is segregated at source. The initiatives focus on 
educating citizens on segregating waste at source  
into dry & wet streams, ensuring that value is derived 
from these resources and, in the process, support 
sustainable livelihood for waste collectors. These 
models operate on a public-private partnership basis 
with active involvement of urban local bodies, civil 
society and the informal sector of waste collectors.
Your Company has exceeded its commitment on 
plastic neutrality for the second consecutive year 
by collecting and sustainably managing more than 
60,000 tonnes of plastic waste across 36 States/Union 
Territories, which is more than the plastic packaging 
utilised by your Company. 
Your Company’s waste recycling programme,  
‘WOW – Well Being Out of Waste’, enables the 
creation of a clean & green environment and promotes 
sustainable livelihoods for waste collectors. During 
the year, the programme continued to be executed 
in Bengaluru, Mysuru, Hyderabad, Coimbatore, 
Chennai, Delhi, major towns of Telangana and several 
districts of Andhra Pradesh. The quantum of dry waste 
collected during the year was about 64,000 MT from 
over 1,270 wards. The programme has covered over  
2.2 crore citizens in over 55 lakh households, 57 lakh 
school children and around 2,100 corporates since its 
inception. It has promoted sustainable livelihood for 
over 17,750 waste collectors by facilitating an effective 
collection system in collaboration with Municipal 
Corporations. The intervention has also created 
over 150 social entrepreneurs who are involved in 
maximising value capture from the collected dry 
waste. In Pune, your Company is supporting a circular 
economy, based on first-of-its-kind Multi-Layer Plastic 
(MLP) collection and recycling programme. 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023 103
ITC Limited

In addition to WOW, a separate community-driven  
programme on decentralised Solid Waste 
Management (SWM), in collaboration with Swachh 
Bharat Mission, is operational in 18 districts across  
10 states covering 10.7 lakh new households, taking 
the cumulative coverage to 25.3 lakh households. 
This programme deals with both wet and dry waste 
and focuses on minimising waste to landfill by 
managing waste at source. Under the programme, 
more than 2.6 lakh MT of waste was collected during 
FY 2022-23, out of which around 1.6 lakh MT of wet 
waste was composted, 64,000 MT of dry waste was 
recycled, and 87% of the total waste was avoided 
from being sent to landfills. Further, home composting 
was practiced by over 5 lakh households. 
In Uttar Pradesh, your Company partnered with  
Urban Development Department under which over 
3,100 Government officials from 57 municipalities 
have been trained on decentralised SWM, thus 
enabling the extension of coverage of decentralised 
waste management to over 19 lakh households.  
Your Company had also signed an MoU with  
Lohiya Swachh Bihar Abhiyan (LSBA), Rural 
Development Department, Government of Bihar to 
train officials on implementation of decentralised  
SWM in 472 villages of Ganga region  
(‘Ganga Gram’) across 12 districts of Bihar. During the 
year, Panchayat officials of 446 Ganga Gram villages 
were trained through a cascade approach, who then 
initiated focused waste management activities  
in their villages.
During the year, your Company has also collaborated 
with Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
(DDWS), Government of India, and India Sanitation 
Coalition (ISC), FICCI, to develop 36 Gram 
Panchayats (GPs) across 10 states as Lighthouses, 
demonstrating best practices in sanitation and waste 
management, which will be adopted by other GPs 
gradually. The partnership is part of the DDWS’s  
plan of creating 75 lighthouse Gram Panchayats 
across India.
The ‘Green Temple’ initiative, powered by  
your Company’s Social Investments programme  
‘Mission Sunehra Kal’, is a closed loop waste 
management model involving processing of waste 
generated in temples to provide biogas to the temple 
kitchens and compost for its gardens. The initiative 
has expanded to over 950 temples across Andhra 
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Tamil Nadu, 
Telangana, Karnataka and Maharashtra.
Promoting Thought Leadership in Sustainability
To ensure wider adoption of the ‘Triple Bottom Line’ 
philosophy across the Industry, your Company 
established the ‘CII – ITC Centre of Excellence 
for Sustainable Development’ (CESD) in 2006 in 
collaboration with the Confederation of Indian Industry 
(CII). The Centre continues to focus on its endeavour 
to promote sustainable business practices amongst 
Indian enterprises. The major highlights during the 
year include the following: 
Climate Change 
–	 The CII Climate Action Charter was launched 
in September 2022, at the 17th Sustainability 
Summit. The Charter has more than 150 
signatories from a wide variety of sectors including 
hard-to-abate and service sectors, diversified 
businesses and MSMEs4.
–	 India released its Long-term Low Emissions and  
Development Strategies (LTLEDS) at the UN 
climate conference (COP27) at Sharm El-Shiekh, 
Egypt in November 2022. The Centre was 
nominated by MoEFCC5 as Technical Advisory 
Unit and the Chair for the Task Force 4 on  
low-emission industrial systems. Inputs for 
the LTLEDS were provided to MoEFCC via 
consultations with stakeholders under this taskforce. 
–	 The Centre organised three key events at  
COP 27 – ‘Driving Climate Adaptation & Resilience 
through Nature Conservation’, ‘Aligning Clean Air 
& Climate Actions’ and ‘Energy Storage - Charging 
the energy transition for businesses in India’. 
–	 Under India’s G20 presidency, CII is playing the 
role of B20 secretariat. The Centre is leading the 
work on framing policy briefs under the Taskforce 
Report of the Board of Directors
104
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
4 Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
5 Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change

on Energy, Climate Change & Resource Efficiency 
and Action Council on ESG in Business.
–	 The Centre has assisted in preparing GHG 
inventory and report for the Industrial Processes 
and Product Use (IPPU) sector for India’s Third 
National Communication to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) on ‘Greening India’s Power Grids’. 
Circular Economy 
–	 ‘India Plastics Pact’ (IPP) is a business-led 
initiative to transform the plastics packaging 
value chain from linear to circular. IPP is the first 
in Asia and joins a global network of 13 Plastic 
Pacts. The first IPP Annual Conference was held 
in September 2022 where ‘India Plastics Pact: 
Roadmap to 2030’ was launched.
–	 65 companies operating in India have undertaken 
CESD’s Plastic-use Protocol to record, verify and 
certify elimination/phasing out of single use plastics.
–	 The Centre completed work on a study that aims 
to identify greenhouse gas mitigation strategies 
through Resource Efficiency and Circular Economy 
across the cement value chain.
Biodiversity 
–	 A Memorandum of Cooperation with MoEFCC to 
support multi-stakeholder partnership for Wetlands 
Conservation was signed in May 2022, followed by 
launch of India Wetland Coalition (IWC). 
–	 India Business and Biodiversity Initiative (IBBI) 
submitted businesses’ recommendations on Post 
2020 Global Biodiversity Framework to MoEFCC, 
which were used during the COP15 of UN 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). 
–	 IBBI facilitated a National Consultation Group 
on draft Taskforce for Nature related Financial 
Disclosure Framework (TNFD), to be launched 
in 2023. 
Air Pollution 
–	 In all, 101 signatories to the ‘India CEO Forum 
for Clean Air’ have committed to take action on 
air pollution.
–	 A national-level dynamic library of solutions 
designed for air pollution was launched in 
August 2022.
–	 Crop Residue Management intervention covering 
300 villages across 12 districts of Punjab-Haryana 
was carried out - preliminary results show 
avoidance of burning on 85% of total intervened 
farmland (appx. 3 lakh acres) in the year 2022. 
A report summarising the impacts and learnings of 
Crop Residue Management activity was released on 
International Day for Clean Air in September 2022. 
Excellence in Sustainability 
–	 The 17th Sustainability Summit, with the theme of 
Building a Sustainable Tomorrow: Transforming 
Risks into Opportunities was organised with the 
support of 28 partner organisations.
ESG Intelligence & Analytics: The Centre 
conceptualised this service to help Indian companies 
understand material ESG risks and opportunities and 
help develop mitigation actions. The service is based 
on a SaaS-based tool developed by CII CESD with 
support of third-party vendors. 
Eco Edge launched by the Centre is aimed at 
integrating sustainability in value chains of companies. 
Key action areas in 2022 included training, developing 
assessment methodology, stakeholder consultations, 
among others.
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY (CSR)
Your Company’s overarching commitment towards 
creating significant and sustainable societal value is 
manifest in its CSR initiatives that embrace the most 
disadvantaged sections of society, especially in rural 
India, through economic empowerment based on 
grassroots capacity building. Your Company has a 
comprehensive CSR Policy outlining programmes, 
projects and activities that your Company undertakes 
to create a significant positive impact on identified 
stakeholders. All these programmes fall within the 
purview of Section 135 read with Schedule VII of the 
Companies Act, 2013 and the Companies (Corporate 
Social Responsibility Policy) Rules, 2014.
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023 105
ITC Limited

The key elements of your Company’s CSR 
interventions are to:
–	 deepen engagement in identified core operational 
geographies to promote holistic development and 
design interventions in order to respond to the 
most significant development challenges of your 
Company’s stakeholder groups.
–	 strengthen capabilities of Non-Government 
Organisations (NGOs)/Community Based 
Organisations (CBOs) in all project catchments for 
participatory planning, ownership and sustainability 
of interventions.
–	 drive the development agenda in a manner that 
empowers women and benefits the poor and 
marginalised communities in the vicinity of your 
Company’s factories and agri-catchments, thereby 
significantly improving Human Development 
Indices (HDI).
–	 ensure behavioural change through focus on 
demand generation for all interventions, thereby 
enabling participation, contribution and asset 
creation for the community.
–	 strive for scale with impact by leveraging 
government partnerships and accessing the most 
contemporary knowledge/technical know-how.
Your Company’s stakeholders are confronted with 
multi-dimensional and inter-related concerns, at the 
core of which is the challenge of securing sustainable 
livelihoods. Your Company undertakes periodic 
stakeholder engagements in the form of community 
need assessments, impact assessments and 
other evaluations. During the year, your Company 
undertook 66 community engagements across  
14 states where your Company’s Social Investments 
Programme is being implemented to discuss views 
and grievances, if any, of the community members. 
Additionally, over 26,000 household surveys were 
taken up in 14 states to estimate the household 
level gaps that need to be addressed. Accordingly, 
interventions under your Company’s Social 
Investments programme are appropriately designed to 
build capacities and promote sustainable livelihoods. 
Your Company’s Social Investments Programme 
follows the Two Horizon approach that focuses 
on inclusive growth and holistic development of 
households with women and poor & vulnerable 
communities at the core. In addition to being 
beneficiaries of several programmes, women are 
also influencers and active participants in grassroot 
institutions. Several progressive women beneficiaries 
also act as change makers in society.
The Two Horizon approach provides an integrated 
and affirmative response to development with 
Horizon-I focusing on strengthening and sustaining 
livelihoods of communities (primarily agriculture and 
allied sector livelihoods) and Horizon-II focusing 
on building capabilities and capacities to empower 
beneficiaries for a better life tomorrow. 
The footprint of your Company’s CSR projects is 
spread across 27 States/Union Territories covering 
over 300 districts.
Your Company’s CSR interventions were conferred 
with three prestigious awards and recognitions during 
FY 2022-23:
–	 16th Edition of CII – National Awards for 
Excellence in Water Management under the 
category ‘Beyond the Fence’ for its Ghod River 
Basin Project.
–	 FICCI CSR Award for its ‘Ghod River Basin Project’ 
under the category ‘Environment Sustainability’ for  
Private Sector Companies with turnover of over  
` 3000 crores per annum.
–	 Recognition under ‘Protect and Restore Community 
Water Structures’ category at Water Sustainability 
Awards by TERI in collaboration with UNDP and 
the International Water Association (IWA).
Social Forestry
Your Company’s pioneering afforestation initiative 
through the Social Forestry programme greened over 
31,000 acres during the year. It is currently spread 
across 17 districts in 6 States covering over 4.56 lakh 
acres in nearly 7,000 villages, impacting over 1.76 
lakh poor households. Together with your Company’s 
Farm Forestry programme, this initiative has greened 
over 10.4 lakh acres till date, and generated about 
190 million-person days of employment for rural 
households, including women, poor tribal and 
Report of the Board of Directors
106
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

marginal farmers. Integral to the Social Forestry 
programme is the Agro-Forestry initiative including 
plantations on bunds, which cumulatively extends 
to about 2 lakh acres and ensures food, fodder and 
wood security. Further, fast growing, high yielding 
and disease resistant hybrid clones and saplings of 
eucalyptus pulpwood developed by your Company 
deliver significantly higher productivity vis-a-vis earlier 
clones. The clones have been developed to grow 
under varying ecological conditions, thereby building 
resilience and contributing towards increasing income 
for the farming community. 
Besides enhancing farm level employment, generating 
incomes and increasing green cover, this large-scale 
initiative also contributes meaningfully to the nation’s 
endeavour to create additional carbon sinks for 
tackling climate change.
In addition to the above, the Social and Farm Forestry 
initiative of your Company, through a multiplier effect, 
has led to improvement in pulpwood and fuelwood 
availability in Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka 
and Odisha. 
Water Stewardship Programme
The Water Stewardship programme aims to facilitate 
water security for all dependents in the factory 
catchments and to drought-proof the agri-catchments 
to minimise risks to agricultural livelihoods arising 
from drought and moisture stress. The programme 
promotes the development and management of 
local water resources in moisture-stressed areas by 
facilitating community participation in planning and 
implementing such measures, as well as building, 
reviving and maintaining water-harvesting structures. 
The coverage of this programme currently extends 
to 45 districts of 16 states. During the year, the area 
under watershed increased by over 1.36 lakh acres, 
taking the cumulative coverage area to over  
14.7 lakh acres. Over 3,100 water-harvesting 
structures including ground water recharge structures 
were built during the year, creating nearly 3.8 million 
cubic metres of rainwater harvesting potential. This 
took the total number of water harvesting structures  
to over 28,300 and the net water storage to over  
48.9 million cubic meters. In addition, as part of 
demand management intervention, your Company 
continues to work with farmers to achieve ‘more crop 
per drop’ by promoting agronomic practices and micro 
irrigation techniques targeted towards saving water 
in cultivation and improving farmer incomes. Around 
11.8 lakh acres have been covered across 12 states 
during the year as part of demand management; 
more than twice that of the previous year. Studies 
have been conducted by Vasantdada Sugar Institute 
and Tamil Nadu Agricultural University to estimate 
water savings in sugarcane, coconut and banana in 
your Company’s programme locations. According to 
these studies and other research documents, demand 
management practices promoted by your Company 
have led to potential water savings to the tune of 
nearly 780 million cubic metres during the year.
Additionally, your Company is continuing partnerships 
with multiple state government departments for  
Water Stewardship. Under the partnership with 
Watershed Development Department, Government  
of Karnataka, capacities are being built using your  
Company’s Water Stewardship approach to  
drought-proof 157 watersheds across 29 districts 
covering over 11.6 lakh acres. During the year, 
Government officials responsible for all watersheds 
were trained to incorporate your Company’s  
drought-proofing framework and positive water 
balance-based planning. The Government has initiated 
work on 135 watersheds covering 2 lakh acres  
and has already constructed 818 water harvesting 
and ground water recharge structures based on the 
training provided by your Company.
Driven by your Company’s Water Stewardship 
programme, Malur Food unit of your Company 
became the second unit after Kovai Paper to receive 
an AWS certification in Platinum category.
Biodiversity
The focus of the programme is on reviving ecosystem 
services provided to agriculture such as natural 
regulation of pests, pollination, nutrient cycling, 
soil health retention and genetic diversity, which 
have witnessed considerable erosion over the past 
few decades. During the year, your Company’s 
biodiversity conservation initiative covered over  
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023 107
ITC Limited

1.5 lakh acres in over 41 districts across 11 states, 
taking the cumulative area under biodiversity 
conservation to over 2.9 lakh acres. While the 
conservation work is being carried out in village 
commons, this intervention significantly benefits 
agricultural activity in the vicinity of these plots 
through soil moisture retention, carbon sequestration 
and by acting as hosts to insects and birds beneficial 
to agriculture. During the year, two technical studies 
were undertaken through ‘The Energy and Resources 
Institute’ (TERI) & ‘IORA Ecological Solutions’. These 
studies covered a universe of over 1 lakh acres of 
biodiversity conservation work done by your Company 
in two years across seven states. The studies have 
recorded improvement in carbon stocks, i.e. carbon 
sequestered by trees, as well as floral and faunal 
biodiversity compared to control areas. 
To increase the coverage for pastureland development  
and biodiversity conservation, your Company 
partnered with Forest Departments of Maharashtra 
and Telangana, and Wasteland & Pastureland 
Development Board (WPDB) of Rajasthan.  
The partnership with WPDB is targeted to cover  
2.5 lakh acres across 8 districts. Further, as part of this 
partnership, during the year, 924 Government staff 
of these districts were trained for implementing the 
programme across 3,600 villages. 
Climate Smart Agriculture
The Climate Smart Agriculture programme  
attempts to de-risk farmers from erratic weather 
events through the promotion and adaptation of 
climate-smart agriculture premised on dissemination 
of relevant package of practices, adoption of 
appropriate mechanisation and provision of 
institutional services. Currently, 23.4 lakh acres 
and over 7.4 lakh farmers are covered under the 
programme, representing an increase of 54% and 
64% respectively over previous year. To provide 
additional support to farmers in dealing with climate 
risks, 9.5 lakh linkages were facilitated for farmers 
with six major Government schemes. In addition to 
promotion of Climate Smart Agri practices at scale,  
in core agricultural catchments, Climate Smart Village 
(CSV) programme has also been initiated, wherein 
support is provided to majority of village population to 
enable adaptation to climate risks, mitigating the  
same through knowledge, livelihood diversification, 
natural resources management and institutional 
support. Details of Climate Smart Agriculture 
interventions are also provided in the section on 
‘Socio-Economic Environment’.
During the year, knowledge was disseminated through 
more than 8,200 Farmer Field Schools and over  
2,300 Choupal Pradarshan Khets. Over 900 
Agri Business Centres delivered extension services, 
arranged agri-credit linkages, established collective 
input procurement and provided agricultural equipment  
for hire. In pursuit of your Company’s long-term 
sustainability objective of increasing soil organic 
carbon, more than 3,600 compost units were 
constructed during the year, taking the total number  
till date to over 55,000 units. 
Your Company, with its presence across multiple 
commodities and geographies including e-Choupal 
network and agri extension programmes network, 
undertook an initiative to facilitate formation of 
new FPOs and/or strengthening existing FPOs, 
thus enhancing farm incomes, rural livelihood and 
partnering in other relevant rural development 
initiatives. During FY 2022-23, your Company 
supported additional 905 FPOs taking the cumulative 
number to 1,150 FPOs.
The ‘Adarsh Gram Programme’ pioneered by your 
Company’s Agri Business presently covers 350 
model villages in the states of Andhra Pradesh 
and Karnataka. Under this initiative, your Company 
supports villages to become economically, 
ecologically and socially sustainable. Your Company 
is also addressing the human rights and farm safety 
challenges in Indian farming by educating the farmers, 
labour & community, providing access to Personal 
Protective Equipment (PPE) kits and adopting smart 
technologies like drones for spraying activities on 
the farms. 
The ‘Baareh Mahine Hariyali’ programme in select 
districts of Uttar Pradesh (Chandauli, Ghazipur, 
Prayagraj and Varanasi) is a pioneering initiative 
to facilitate farmers to enhance their incomes. 
This programme is founded on a 360-degree, 
multipronged approach with interventions such as 
Report of the Board of Directors
108
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

increased cropping intensity with a third crop during 
summer, enhancement of productivity through  
context-specific agronomic practices demonstrated 
through Choupal Pradarshan Khets (on-farm 
demonstrations) and provision of market linkages 
with transparency in assessment of quality, price 
and weighment. In some regions, taking a holistic 
approach to income diversification as an adjacency, 
livestock development, women empowerment and 
agro-forestry are also included. Over 2 lakh farmers 
have already benefited from the interventions under 
this programme – over 35,000 farmers who have 
adopted the package of practices reported doubling 
of income and those who have implemented the 
programme partially reported increase in their incomes 
by 30% to 75%. 
Livestock Development
The programme provides an opportunity for 
households to improve their livestock-based 
livelihoods by improving productivity of the progeny 
through breed improvement and dissemination  
of improved animal husbandry practices.  
The programme provided extension services, including 
breeding, fodder propagation and training to farmers 
owning cows and buffaloes in 8 states and 22 districts. 
During the year, over 1.35 lakh artificial inseminations 
(AIs) were carried out which led to the birth of 0.45 lakh 
high yielding progeny. Cumulatively, the figures for 
AIs and calving stand at around 28.6 lakh and 10 lakh 
respectively. In addition, the livestock programme 
also covered families engaged in goat and sheep, 
poultry, piggery and fishery rearing, enhancing 
their productivity through promotion of improved 
management practices. Under the programme, over 
400 women trained as ‘Pashu Sakhis’ have provided 
extension services to over 45,000 households till date, 
thus enabling Pashu Sakhis to earn supplementary 
income of up to ` 5000 per month. 
Your Company is also working with dairy farmers 
in Bihar and West Bengal to improve productivity 
through several extension services and to facilitate 
higher milk production. Qualified teams comprising 
veterinarians and para-veterinarians have been 
deployed to facilitate animal breeding, animal nutrition 
and animal health services towards improving 
productivity and promoting commercial dairy farming 
among farmers. During the year, about 84,700 cattle 
of over 33,800 dairy farmers across 547 villages in 
9 districts of Bihar and 3 districts of West Bengal were 
supported through training programmes on clean milk 
production, mastitis control and animal husbandry 
services like deworming, ectoparasite control, etc. 
Women Empowerment
During the year, this initiative provided a range of 
gainful livelihood opportunities to around 35,400 poor 
women, taking the cumulative coverage to over  
1.22 lakh. Of the beneficiaries till date, about 32,600 
ultra-poor women in your Company’s core catchments 
were provided with assets and support to initiate 
enterprise of their choice and now have access 
to sustainable sources of income through various 
livelihood opportunities. Studies have shown that 
the income of these ultra-poor women beneficiaries 
has increased by more than five-fold, aided by the 
programme. The financial literacy and inclusion 
project, in partnership with Madhya Pradesh State 
Rural Livelihood Mission (MPSRLM) and CRISIL 
Foundation, was extended for two more years to 
cover 9 additional districts, increasing the operational 
presence in the State to 52 districts. 173 Super 
Trainers were trained directly who in turn trained 
1,372 Master Trainers; the training was thereafter 
cascaded to over 83,000 self-help-groups (SHGs) 
covering more than 7.6 lakh women during the year. 
The programme has cumulatively covered over  
2.1 lakh SHGs benefiting over 20.7 lakh women 
across more than 20,800 villages. Over 16.9 lakh 
trained women have also been provided access 
to bank accounts and government social security 
schemes till date. 
Education
The Primary Education programme aims to provide 
children from weaker sections of society access 
to education with focus on learning outcomes and 
retention. Operational in 32 districts of 12 states, the 
programme covered over 2.5 lakh children during the 
year, taking the cumulative coverage to over  
11 lakh children. Under the Read India Programme, 
the proportion of primary level children who were 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023 109
ITC Limited

able to perform basic mathematical computations 
increased from 15% to 90%. Over 386 government 
primary schools and anganwadis were provided 
infrastructure support comprising boundary walls, 
additional classrooms, sanitation units and furniture, 
taking the total number of government primary 
schools and anganwadis covered till date to around 
3,300. Infrastructure support to government schools 
has helped in increasing enrolment, particularly of 
girls, in schools. To ensure sustainable operations 
and maintenance of infrastructure provided, more than 
780 School Management Committees and around  
680 Child Cabinets and Water and Sanitation 
(WATSAN) Committees were operational in various 
schools during the year with active involvement of 
students and teachers. Further, 125 Supplementary 
Learning Centres (SLCs) were operational during the 
year, mainstreaming more than 2,000 out-of-school 
children into the formal education system.
Skilling & Vocational Training
This programme provides training in market linked 
skills to youth to enable them to compete in the job 
market. More than 14,400 youth were trained under 
different courses during the year of which 46% were 
female. The placement percentage for those trained 
during the year stood at 68%. Further, a pilot program 
for skilling differently abled youth was also initiated in 
Bangalore, with placements of over 75%. 
Cumulatively, over 1 lakh youth have been trained 
under the skilling programme, with presence 
expanding to 34 districts in 16 States.
Sanitation
Your Company continues to adopt a multi-pronged 
approach towards improving public health and 
hygiene across 10 districts and 7 states. To promote 
a hygienic environment through prevention of open 
defecation and reduced incidence of water-borne 
diseases, 200 Individual Household Toilets (IHHTs) 
were constructed in collaboration with the State 
Government/District sanitation departments, taking 
the total to over 39,600 IHHTs constructed so far in 
your Company’s catchment areas. In addition, during 
the year, 35 community toilets were constructed/
renovated for households without land, taking 
the cumulative to 157. Cumulatively, IHHTs and 
community toilets are estimated to be benefiting over 
1.15 lakh community members. In West Bengal, more 
than 6,700 women benefited from well-maintained 
separate community toilets with incinerator facilities. 
Along with sanitation infrastructure development, 
special focus was also given to awareness campaigns 
to drive behavioural change. 
Health & Nutrition
Your Company continued to enhance awareness on 
various health related issues through a network of 
430 women Village Health Champions (VHCs) who 
covered nearly 1.16 lakh women and adolescent girls 
during the year. The programme is operational in 
seven districts of Uttar Pradesh and three districts of  
Madhya Pradesh. The VHCs conducted door-to-door  
visits in the villages focusing on aspects like 
sanitation, menstrual and personal hygiene, family 
planning, diarrhoea prevention and nutrition.
Over 5.6 lakh beneficiaries were covered under the 
Mother and Child Health and Nutrition initiative aimed 
at improving the health-nutrition status of women, 
adolescents and children in the catchments of a few 
of your Company’s factories with high maternal and 
infant mortality indices. As per internal estimates, the 
proportion of underweight children between 0-5 years 
of age in the two districts of Kamrup and Darrang 
stood at 5.6% and 9.8% in FY 2022-23, significantly 
lower than districts’ averages6 of 19.7% and 33.1% 
respectively. Based on success of the programme 
in these two districts, Directorate of Social Welfare, 
Government of Assam has entered into a partnership 
with your Company to help address challenges of 
malnutrition in 8 districts including 7 aspirational 
districts in the state. 
Additionally, Project Samposhan was undertaken 
during the year to address the issue of anaemia 
amongst adolescent girls in the districts of Bahraich 
& Chandauli, Uttar Pradesh. Similarly, Project 
Balposhan was undertaken in Valsad district of 
Gujarat to create awareness amongst mothers, 
pregnant & lactating women on child malnutrition.
Report of the Board of Directors
110
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
6 as per NFHS-5 data of FY 2019-20

To bridge the gaps in primary and secondary 
healthcare delivery and to address the challenges of 
awareness, availability, accessibility and affordability, 
your Company has undertaken several Rural 
Healthcare interventions that are being implemented 
in a phased manner. After starting with the Mother 
and Child Health initiative in FY 2016-17, your 
Company is now adopting a holistic approach 
focusing on two major components - preventive 
health care and curative services. The objective of 
the initiative is to improve health and nutrition by 
strengthening institutional capacity, supplementing 
existing infrastructure, promoting greater convergence 
with existing government schemes, leveraging 
technology and increasing access to basic primary 
and secondary healthcare services. As part of this 
project, ‘ITC Swaasth Kiran’ initiative was launched 
during FY 2021-22 in Saharanpur and Munger 
districts. Under the initiative, 8 Mobile Medical Units 
(MMU) - 4 each in Saharanpur & Munger became 
operational during the year. These MMUs provided 
free medical consultation and medicines to the rural 
community at doorstep. During the year, more than 
57,000 individual engagements were made with 
community members, 56% of which were women, 
across over 690 villages. Further, 6,900 diagnostic 
tests were conducted and 5,600 referrals were made 
during the year. Upgradation of Public Healthcare 
Centres was also initiated with the involvement of the 
local community under the initiative. Simultaneously, 
plans to set up a 50-bed hospital for secondary care  
are being pursued. Accordingly, for such ongoing 
activities, in FY 2022-23, an amount of ` 23.10 crores 
has been kept aside under unspent CSR account and  
will be spent over a period of next three financial years. 
To make potable water available to local communities 
in Andhra Pradesh, Reverse Osmosis (RO) water 
purification plants were set up in villages where 
the water quality was poor. 9 new RO plants were 
established in FY 2022-23 taking the total operational 
RO plants to 160, thus providing safe drinking water to 
over 2.1 lakh rural people. 
Your Company’s ‘Swasth India Mission’ programme 
has been a front runner in driving behavioural change 
towards good hand hygiene habits since its inception 
in 2016. The Swasth India Mission drove a range of 
initiatives to aid and enable the country in its fight 
against preventable infections that create huge 
economic burden on the country.
–	 Your Company launched a campaign focused 
on children, rooted in the belief ‘Swasth Bacche, 
Mazboot Desh’. The mission reached out to school 
students through an innovative school programme 
focused on seeding good hygiene behavior. The 
school programme covered 8,383 schools reaching 
out to appx. 22.4 lakh students.
–	 Your Company launched the #HandwashFirst 
campaign on the occasion of World Hand Hygiene 
Day, which was promoted nationally on TV and 
digital media including tie-ups with influencers on 
the short video platform ‘Josh’.
–	 Your Company also launched an innovative 
digital campaign using gamified creatives to 
spread awareness about proper health & hygiene 
practices to be followed during monsoon season.
Your Company joined hands with Master Blaster 
Sachin Tendulkar, World’s first ‘Hand Ambassador’, 
and launched a series of short films to promote 
the practice of washing hands, with the message 
being widely disseminated through multiple 
outreach formats.
Waste Management 
Your Company’s initiatives focus on creating 
replicable, scalable and sustainable models of 
municipal and rural waste management that can 
be implemented across the country to ensure that 
zero waste goes to landfills. Details of these models 
are provided in the section on ’Building a Circular 
Economy for Post-Consumer Packaging’ above.
ITC Sangeet Research Academy 
The ITC Sangeet Research Academy (ITC SRA), 
established in 1977, is an embodiment of your 
Company’s sustained commitment to a priceless 
national heritage. Your Company’s pledge towards 
ensuring enduring excellence in Classical Music 
education continues to drive ITC SRA in furthering its 
objective of preserving and propagating Hindustani 
Classical Music based on the age-old principle of 
‘Guru-Shishya Parampara’. The eminent Gurus of 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023 111
ITC Limited

the Academy impart intensive training and quality 
education in Hindustani classical music to the 
scholars. The present Gurus of the Academy are 
Padma Bhushan Pt. Ajoy Chakrabarty, Padma 
Shri Pt. Ulhas Kashalkar, Pt. Partha Chatterjee, 
Pt. Uday Bhawalkar, Vidushi Subhra Guha, Shri 
Omkar Dadarkar and Shri Brajeswar Mukherjee. 
The Academy’s focus continues to be on nurturing 
exceptionally gifted students selected from across the 
country through a system of multi-level audition.  
Full scholarship is provided to them to reside and 
pursue music education in the Academy’s campus 
and in other designated locations under the tutelage of 
the country’s most distinguished musicians. Creation of 
the next generation of masters of Hindustani classical 
music for the propagation of a precious legacy 
continues to be the Academy’s objective.
Forging Multi-Stakeholder Partnerships 
Your Company’s Social Investments Programme 
lays continuous emphasis on building partnerships of 
value for driving innovation & gaining contemporary 
knowledge while effectively amplifying and executing 
programmes.
Your Company formed Knowledge Partnerships 
with several national & international organisations/
agencies to maintain contemporariness and leverage 
latest knowledge/technical know-how to continuously 
improve the quality of programmes.
Public-Private Partnerships, aimed at pooling 
resources, and partnership with Governments 
are effectively leveraged to scale-up and amplify 
programmes implemented in your Company’s 
catchment areas. 
The meaningful contribution made by your Company’s 
Social Investments Programme to address some 
of the country’s key development challenges, has 
been possible in significant measure, due to your 
Company’s partnerships with renowned NGOs such 
as BAIF, DSC, FES, DHAN Foundation, MYRADA, 
Pratham, SEWA Bharat, WASH Institute, Water for 
People, MAMTA, Youth Invest, Cheshire Disability 
Trust amongst others. These partnerships, which 
bring together the best-in-class management practices 
of your Company and the development experience 
and mobilisation skills of NGOs, will continue to 
provide innovative grassroot solutions to some of 
India’s most challenging problems of development in 
the years to come. 
CSR Expenditure 
The annual report on Corporate Social Responsibility 
activities, as required under Sections 134 and 135 
of the Companies Act, 2013 read with Rule 8 of the 
Companies (Corporate Social Responsibility Policy) 
Rules, 2014 and Rule 9 of the Companies (Accounts) 
Rules, 2014, is provided in the Annexure forming part 
of this Report. 
Environment, Health & Safety
Your Company’s Environment, Health & Safety (EHS) 
strategies are directed towards achieving the greenest 
and safest operations across all your Company’s units 
by optimising natural resource usage and providing a 
safe and healthy workplace. Systemic efforts continue 
to be made towards natural resource conservation by 
continuously improving resource-use efficiencies.
Your Company believes that a safe and healthy 
work environment is a pre-requisite for ensuring 
employee well-being, and adopting best practices in 
occupational health & safety bears a direct impact on 
overall performance. With an aim to percolate safety 
deeper into ITC’s operational practices and achieve 
the ‘Zero Accident’ goal, your Company has adopted 
a comprehensive EHS strategy founded on two pillars: 
‘Safety by Design’ and ‘Safety by Culture’.
Safety
Your Company sustained focus on ‘Safety by Design’ 
by continuously striving to improve safety performance 
and incorporating best-in-class engineering standards 
for all investments in the built environment. Designs 
for all new greenfield & brownfield project investments 
are scrutinised to ensure compliance with relevant 
standards and codes on safety. Periodic Environment, 
Health & Safety audits continue to be carried 
out in operational units to verify compliance with 
relevant standards.
To drive a culture of safety, your Company, in addition 
to comprehensive focus on training, continues to hold 
Report of the Board of Directors
112
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

structured conversations with workers on ‘Safe and 
Unsafe’ Acts. These are supplemented by adoption 
of keystone behaviours that inculcates individual 
ownership for safe behaviour. Your Company has  
also pioneered the usage of Design Thinking principles 
for seamless integration of safety in business 
operations. This initiative is bringing in positive 
behavioural changes. 
Several national awards and certifications received by 
various units reaffirm your Company’s commitment to 
provide safe and healthy workplace to all.
R&D, QUALITY AND PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
Your Company’s state-of-the-art Life Sciences and 
Technology Centre (LSTC) in Bengaluru is at the  
core of driving science-led product innovation to  
build and support your Company’s portfolio of  
world-class products and brands. LSTC is on the 
verge of completing five decades of innovation this 
year. Over the years, LSTC has emerged as a robust 
innovation engine that is a key enabler of the  
‘ITC Next’ growth strategy. Reinforced with  
world-class infrastructure, resourced with a diverse 
team of over 400 highly qualified scientists, LSTC is 
leading various initiatives to provide a competitive 
edge to your Company’s brands and products. 
Driving purposeful innovations that fulfil the needs 
of the Indian consumer through superior offerings 
remains the key objective of LSTC. Centres of 
Excellence across domains viz. Biosciences,  
Agri-sciences & Materials sciences enabled 
building capabilities over the years to cater to the 
constantly evolving needs of consumers. Focused 
research across identified domains viz. Health & 
Wellness, Formulation Design, Sustainable Materials 
& Packaging, Agro-forestry and Crop Science 
has enabled the teams to harness contemporary 
advances in relevant core areas to translate ‘proofs 
of concept’ to novel product opportunities. Bearing 
testimony to LSTC’s innovation capabilities while 
building the intellectual assets for your Company, 
over 800 patent applications have been filed till date. 
Robust risk management practices are in place to 
ensure that your Company’s intellectual properties 
remain adequately protected and to ensure mitigation 
of information and infrastructure risk. 
Research programmes and projects are structured 
through close alignment with the various Businesses 
of your Company resulting in a robust innovation 
pipeline. Additionally, in line with your Company’s 
relentless focus on operational excellence and quality, 
each Business is mandated to continuously innovate 
on materials, processes and systems to enhance their 
competitiveness. 
Your Company has been a forerunner in introducing 
first-to-market innovative products for Indian 
consumers. In the post-pandemic operating scenario 
of unprecedented volatility and hyper-inflationary 
pressures, LSTC scientists and product development 
teams continue to enable the Branded Packaged 
Foods and Personal Care Businesses to deliver a 
range of differentiated, superior quality products 
at competitive costs. Innovative science-based 
programmes continue to be leveraged to drive 
creation of healthier foods through systematic 
reduction in salt, sugar and fat without compromising 
on sensory attributes. Leading edge technology 
platforms in Personal Health & Hygiene, Health & 
Wellness continue to power innovation and develop 
next generation product offerings to serve emergent 
consumer needs. LSTC’s unique competencies in 
Materials and Packaging have enabled development 
of innovative recyclable flexible packaging options and 
bio-compostable coating solutions. 
In Agro-Forestry and Crop Science Platforms, LSTC 
has an ambitious R&D programme on improving 
yield and quality, given the rising challenges of 
climate change and depleting resources. Ongoing 
research on climate resilient crops and pulp wood 
seeks to address the security of raw material 
supplies across your Company’s value chains while 
ensuring enhanced farmer profitability. Research 
on wheat and potato varietal securitisation are at 
advanced stages of development to achieve  
flexibility in sourcing of raw material, create  
region-specific blends and ensure robust agro-climatic 
adaptability. Future ready, alternate value chains that 
mitigate risks arising out of disruptions to existing 
sourcing models continue to be explored. LSTC, in 
collaboration with the Agri and Branded Packaged 
Foods Businesses, endeavours to ensure that 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023 113
ITC Limited

science-based ideas are fully integrated across the 
value chain from farm to fork. 
Infrastructure capabilities across science areas 
and new product development are strengthened 
continuously keeping in pace with the global 
developments. Modern testing facilities include 
estimation of disease resistance in plant varieties, 
determination of biodegradability of newly developed 
materials for sustainable packaging, detection of 
extraneous materials in foods and prediction of 
packaged product structural stability during transit.
Rigorous systems, processes and industry best 
practices are continuously upgraded to secure quality 
certifications of the highest levels – a key enabler in 
delivering products that follow the highest standards in 
quality, safety and efficacy to the Indian consumer. All  
branded packaged foods manufacturing units of your 
Company not only have ISO quality certification but 
also follow the highest standards under the integrated 
food quality management system-FSSC 22000; these  
systems ensure adherence to internationally accepted 
quality standards in producing safe and high-quality 
food. All manufacturing units of the Branded Packaged 
Foods Businesses (including contract manufacturing 
units) and Hotels operate in compliance with stringent 
food safety and quality standards. Your Company’s 
food quality assurance laboratories are accredited by 
the National Accreditation Board for Testing and  
Calibration Laboratories (NABL) under ISO 17025,  
a global standard for testing and calibrating labs,  
which guarantees quality. Additionally, the quality  
of all FMCG products of your Company is monitored 
through best-in-class customer-centric ‘Quality Control 
and Quality Assurance Processes’ and ‘Product 
Quality Ratings Systems’ (PQRS) enhancing 
competitive superiority of your Company’s 
product offerings. 
In its quest to continuously enhance efficiency and 
be future-ready, LSTC is developing and deploying 
cutting-edge digital tools for quality performance 
analytics and competition benchmarking. LSTC 
continues to leverage AI/ML technology platforms 
to strengthen quality management systems. Going 
forward, LSTC will continue to identify growth 
opportunities leveraging your Company’s diverse 
core competencies and R&D insights emerging from 
contemporary science & technology.
PROCEEDINGS INITIATED BY THE 
ENFORCEMENT DIRECTORATE
In the proceedings initiated by the Enforcement 
Directorate in 1997, the appropriate authority after 
hearing arguments on behalf of your Company 
has passed orders in favour of your Company and 
dropped some of the show cause notices issued by 
the Directorate. In respect of some of the remaining 
notices, your Company filed writ petitions challenging 
their validity. The Honourable Calcutta High Court, 
by its orders, allowed these writ petitions, and 
the proceedings in respect of these notices were 
quashed. The remaining notices are pending.
Meanwhile, some of the prosecutions launched by 
the Enforcement Directorate have been quashed 
by the Honourable Calcutta High Court while others 
are pending.
TREASURY OPERATIONS
Your Company’s treasury operations continued 
to focus on deployment of surplus liquidity and 
management of foreign exchange exposures within a 
well-defined risk management framework.
FY 2022-23 witnessed significant volatility in the 
global economy and financial markets. Globally, 
inflation remained at elevated levels for most part of 
the year due to disruptions in supply chains, rise in 
energy and other commodity prices. Central banks 
across the world responded swiftly increasing interest 
rates sharply to rein in inflation. In India, Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI) raised Repo rate by 250 bps which 
resulted in market interest rates moving higher across 
tenures. In addition, decline in the Banking system 
liquidity also contributed to increase in market interest 
rates, particularly in the short tenure segment. 
Investment decisions relating to deployment of 
surplus liquidity continued to be guided by the tenets 
of Safety, Liquidity and Return. Treasury operations 
focused on proactive rebalancing of portfolio 
Report of the Board of Directors
114
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

duration and mix in line with the evolving interest 
rate environment. Further, continuous review and 
monitoring of credit worthiness, including engagement 
with market participants, ensured that the investment 
portfolio was not exposed to undue credit risks.
As in earlier years, commensurate with the size of 
the temporary surplus liquidity under management, 
treasury operations continue to be supported by 
appropriate internal control systems, and independent 
check of 100% of transactions by your Company’s 
Internal Audit Department.
In the currency market, the Indian Rupee (INR) 
depreciated sharply against the US Dollar (US$) 
during the first half of the year. The weakness was 
largely attributable to strength of the US$ relative  
to all major currencies during the year. Towards the 
end of the financial year inversion in US interest 
rate curve, decline in India’s trade deficit, relative 
strength of foreign exchange reserves and judicious 
interventions in the forex market by RBI provided 
support to the INR. 
To effectively navigate the high volatility in currency 
markets, your Company adopted a proactive risk 
management strategy and actively managed foreign 
currency exposures through appropriate hedging 
strategies and market instruments to protect 
business margins. 
DEPOSITS
Your Company’s erstwhile Public Deposit Scheme 
closed in the year 2000. As at 31st March, 2023, there 
were no deposits due for repayment except in respect 
of two deposit holders aggregating ` 20000 which 
have been withheld on the basis of directives received 
from the government agencies.
There was no failure to make repayments of Fixed 
Deposits on maturity and the interest due thereon 
in terms of the conditions of your Company’s 
erstwhile Schemes.
Your Company has not accepted any deposit from the 
public/members under Section 73 of the Companies 
Act, 2013 read with the Companies (Acceptance of 
Deposits) Rules, 2014 during the year. 
DIRECTORS
Changes in Directors
During the year, with your approval, Mr. Supratim Dutta 
was appointed as a Wholetime Director of your 
Company for a period of three years with effect from  
22nd July, 2022, and Mr. Nakul Anand was 
re-appointed as a Wholetime Director of your 
Company for a period of one year with effect from 
3rd January, 2023.
Mr. Peter Rajatilakan Chittaranjan, representing the 
General Insurers’ (Public Sector) Association of India 
(‘GIPSA’), was appointed as an Additional Director by 
the Board of Directors of your Company (‘the Board’) 
with effect from 3rd February, 2023 and thereafter, with 
your approval, as a Non-Executive Director for a period 
of three years with effect from 15th March, 2023. 
The Board on the recommendation of the Nomination 
& Compensation Committee (‘the Committee’), 
has recommended for the approval of the Members, 
the appointment of Ms. Alka Marezban Bharucha as a 
Director and also as an Independent Director of your 
Company for a period of five years with effect from 
12th August, 2023. Ms. Bharucha has the required 
integrity, expertise and experience for appointment  
as an Independent Director of your Company. 
Messrs. Anand Nayak and Ajit Kumar Seth will 
complete their present term as Independent Directors 
of your Company on 12th July, 2024. The Board, 
on the recommendation of the Committee, has 
recommended for the approval of the Members, 
the re-appointment of Messrs. Nayak and Seth as 
Directors and also as Independent Directors of your 
Company for a period of five years with effect from 
13th July, 2024. 
Further, on the recommendation of the Committee, 
the Board has recommended for the approval of the 
Members, the appointment of Mr. Hemant Malik as 
a Director, liable to retire by rotation, and also as a 
Wholetime Director of your Company for a period of 
three years with effect from 12th August, 2023.
Mr. Sanjiv Puri will complete his present term  
as the Managing Director of your Company on  
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023 115
ITC Limited

21st July, 2024. The Board, on the recommendation 
of the Committee, has also recommended for the 
approval of the Members, re-appointment of Mr. Puri 
as a Director, not liable to retire by rotation, and as the 
Managing Director & Chairman of your Company for a 
period of five years with effect from 22nd July, 2024.
Appropriate resolutions seeking your approval to 
the above are appearing in the Notice convening 
the 112th Annual General Meeting (‘AGM’) of 
your Company.
Mr. Rajiv Tandon completed his term as a Wholetime 
Director of your Company with effect from close 
of work on 21st July, 2022 after being associated 
with the ITC Group for 42 years, including 35 years 
with the Company. Further, Mr. Navneet Doda, 
representing GIPSA, stepped down from the Board 
with effect from 20th January, 2023. Your Directors 
place on record their appreciation for the contribution 
made by Messrs. Tandon and Doda during their 
tenure with your Company.
Retirement by Rotation
In accordance with the provisions of Section 152 of 
the Companies Act, 2013 (‘the Act’) read with Articles 
94 and 95 of the Articles of Association of your 
Company, Messrs. Sumant Bhargavan and Mukesh 
Gupta will retire by rotation at the ensuing AGM and 
being eligible, offer themselves for re-election. Your 
Board has recommended their re-election.
Number of Board Meetings
Six meetings of the Board were held during the year 
ended 31st March, 2023.
Attributes, Qualifications & Independence of 
Directors and their Appointment
The Corporate Governance Policy of your Company, 
inter alia, requires that the Non-Executive Directors 
be drawn from amongst eminent professionals, 
with experience in business/finance/law/public 
administration and enterprises. The Nomination & 
Compensation Committee has laid down the criteria 
for determining qualifications, positive attributes and 
independence of Directors (including Independent 
Directors). The Policy on Board Diversity of your 
Company requires the Board to have balance of 
skills, competencies, experience and diversity of 
perspectives appropriate to your Company. The 
skills, expertise and competencies of the Directors 
as identified by the Board, along with those available 
in the present mix of the Directors of your Company, 
are provided in the ‘Report on Corporate Governance’ 
forming part of the Report and Accounts.
In terms of the applicable regulatory requirements 
read with the Articles of Association of your Company, 
the strength of the Board shall not be fewer than six 
nor more than eighteen. Directors are appointed/
re-appointed with the approval of the Members for 
a period of three to five years or a shorter duration, 
in accordance with retirement guidelines and as 
may be determined by the Board from time to time. 
All Directors, other than Independent Directors, are 
liable to retire by rotation, unless otherwise approved 
by the Members. One-third of the Directors who are 
liable to retire by rotation, retire every year and are 
eligible for re-election.
The Independent Directors of your Company 
have confirmed that (a) they meet the criteria of 
independence prescribed under Section 149 of 
the Act and Regulation 16 of the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India (Listing Obligations and 
Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 (‘Listing 
Regulations’), (b) they are independent from the 
management of your Company, and (c) they are not 
aware of any circumstance or situation which could 
impair or impact their ability to discharge duties with 
an objective independent judgement and without any 
external influence. In the opinion of the Board, the 
Independent Directors fulfil the conditions prescribed 
under the Act and the Listing Regulations, and are 
independent of the management of your Company.
Remuneration Policy
Details of your Company’s Policy on remuneration 
of Directors, Key Managerial Personnel and other 
employees are provided in the ‘Report on Corporate 
Governance’ forming part of the Report and Accounts. 
Report of the Board of Directors
116
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited

Evaluation of Board, Board Committees and 
individual Directors
The Nomination & Compensation Committee, as 
reported in earlier years, formulated the Policy on 
Board evaluation, evaluation of Board Committees’ 
functioning and individual Director evaluation, and 
also specified that such evaluation will be done by 
the Board.
In keeping with ITC’s belief that it is the collective 
effectiveness of the Board that impacts Company’s 
performance, the primary evaluation platform is 
that of collective performance of the Board as a 
whole. Board performance is assessed, inter alia, 
against the roles and responsibilities of the Board as 
provided in the Act, the Listing Regulations and your 
Company’s Governance Policy. The parameters for 
Board performance evaluation have been derived 
from the Board’s core role of trusteeship to protect 
and enhance shareholder value as well as to fulfil 
expectations of other stakeholders through strategic 
supervision of your Company; such parameters 
include securing alignment of your Company’s goals 
with the nation’s economic, ecological and social 
priorities, ensuring that your Company has a clearly 
defined strategic direction for realisation of its vision, 
and supporting your Company’s management to 
meet challenges arising from the operating & policy 
environment in the country. Evaluation of functioning 
of Board Committees is based on discussions 
amongst Committee members and shared by the 
respective Committee Chairmen with the Board. 
Individual Directors are evaluated in the context of 
the role played by each Director as a member of 
the Board at its meetings, in assisting the Board 
in realising its role of strategic supervision of the 
functioning of your Company in pursuit of its purpose 
and goals. The peer group ratings of the individual 
Directors are collated by the Chairman of the 
Nomination & Compensation Committee and made 
available to the Chairman of your Company. 
While the Board evaluated its performance against 
the parameters laid down by the Nomination 
& Compensation Committee, the evaluation of 
individual Directors was carried out against the laid 
down parameters anonymously in order to ensure 
objectivity. Reports on the functioning of Committees 
were placed before the Board. The Independent 
Directors Committee of the Board also reviewed the  
performance of the Chairman, other non-Independent  
Directors and the Board, pursuant to Schedule IV to 
the Act and Regulation 25 of the Listing Regulations.
KEY MANAGERIAL PERSONNEL
As stated earlier, Mr. Rajiv Tandon ceased to be a 
Wholetime Director of your Company upon completion 
of term, and Mr. Supratim Dutta was appointed as a  
Wholetime Director of your Company, with effect from 
22nd July, 2022. There were no other changes  
in the Key Managerial Personnel of your Company 
during the year.
AUDIT COMMITTEE & AUDITORS
The composition of the Audit Committee is provided 
under the section ‘Board of Directors and Committees’ 
in the Report and Accounts.
Statutory Auditors
Messrs. S R B C & CO LLP, Chartered Accountants 
(‘SRBC’), were appointed with your approval as the 
Auditors of your Company for a period of five years 
till the conclusion of the 113th AGM. The Board, on 
the recommendation of the Audit Committee, has 
recommended for the approval of the Members, the 
remuneration of SRBC for the financial year  
2023-24. Appropriate resolution seeking your approval 
to the remuneration of SRBC is appearing in the 
Notice convening the 112th AGM of your Company.
Cost Auditors
Your Board, as recommended by the Audit 
Committee, appointed the following Cost Auditors for 
the financial year 2023-24:
(i)	 Messrs. ABK & Associates, Cost Accountants, 
for audit of Cost Records maintained by your 
Company in respect of ‘Wood Pulp’ and ‘Paper and 
Paperboard’ products. 
(ii)	Messrs. S. Mahadevan & Co., Cost Accountants, 
for audit of Cost Records maintained in respect of 
all applicable products of your Company, other than 
‘Wood Pulp’ and ‘Paper and Paperboard’ products. 
Report of the Board of Directors
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023 117
ITC Limited

Pursuant to Section 148 of the Act read with the 
Companies (Audit and Auditors) Rules, 2014, 
appropriate resolutions seeking your ratification to 
the remuneration of the aforesaid Cost Auditors are 
appearing in the Notice convening the 112th AGM of 
your Company. 
Your Company maintains necessary cost records as 
specified by the Central Government under Section 
148(1) of the Act read with the Companies (Cost 
Records and Audit) Rules, 2014.
Secretarial Auditors
Messrs. S. N. Ananthasubramanian & Co., Company 
Secretaries, were appointed by the Board as the 
Secretarial Auditors of your Company for the financial 
year ended 31st March, 2023. The Secretarial 
Auditors have confirmed that your Company has 
complied with the applicable laws and that there 
are adequate systems and processes in your 
Company commensurate with its size and scale of 
operations to monitor and ensure compliance with the 
applicable laws.
The Report of the Secretarial Auditors, pursuant to 
Section 204 of the Act, is provided in the Annexure 
forming part of this Report.
CHANGES IN SHARE CAPITAL
During the year, 10,47,61,810 Ordinary Shares of 
` 1/- each, fully paid-up, were issued and allotted 
upon exercise of 1,04,76,181 Options under your 
Company’s Employee Stock Option Schemes. 
Consequently, the Issued and Subscribed Share 
Capital of your Company, as on 31st March, 2023, 
stands increased to ` 1242,80,17,741/- divided 
into 1242,80,17,741 Ordinary Shares of ` 1/- each. 
The Ordinary Shares issued during the year rank 
pari passu with the existing Ordinary Shares of 
your Company.
EMPLOYEE STOCK OPTION SCHEMES
Disclosures with respect to Stock Options, as required 
under Regulation 14 of the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India (Share Based Employee Benefits and 
Sweat Equity) Regulations, 2021 (‘the Regulations’), 
are available in the Notes to the Financial Statements 
of the Company. The said disclosures forming  
part of the Financial Statements can also be  
accessed on your Company’s corporate website 
http://www.itcportal.com under the section ‘Investor 
Relations’. During the year, there has been no change 
in your Company’s Employee Stock Option Schemes.
Your Company’s Secretarial Auditors have certified 
that the Employee Stock Option Schemes of your 
Company have been implemented in accordance with 
the Regulations and the resolutions passed by the 
Members in this regard.
INVESTOR SERVICE CENTRE
The Investor Service Centre of your Company (‘ISC’), 
registered with the Securities and Exchange Board 
of India as Category II Share Transfer Agent for 
providing in-house share registration and related 
services, continues to maintain exemplary standards 
of investor servicing, while ensuring compliance with 
the applicable statutory requirements.
The ISO 9001:2015 Quality Management System 
Certification for investor servicing by ISC was 
renewed during the year by DNV, the accredited 
agency for ISO certification, for a period of three 
years up to 22nd March, 2026. DNV accorded the 
highest possible ‘Level 5’ rating to ISC’s systems and 
processes, exemplifying the excellence achieved 
by ISC in providing best-in-class services to the 
shareholders and investors of your Company.
A Shareholder Satisfaction Survey was conducted by 
the Company during the year with a view to assess 
and further improve the performance standards of 
ISC. Over 49,000 shareholders participated in the 
Survey. Of the same, more than 94% were satisfied 
with the services provided by ISC, with 80% of the 
shareholders rating the services as excellent. The 
feedback/suggestions provided by the shareholders 
are being evaluated for appropriate action. 
The ‘Investor Relations’ section on your Company’s 
corporate website http://www.itcportal.com serves 
as a user-friendly reference for the shareholders and 
investors in respect of share related matters.
118
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
Report of the Board of Directors

RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
All contracts or arrangements entered into by your 
Company with its related parties during the financial 
year were in accordance with the provisions of the 
Companies Act, 2013 and the Listing Regulations. All 
such contracts or arrangements, which were approved 
by the Audit Committee, were in the ordinary course 
of business and on arm’s length basis. No material 
contracts or arrangements with related parties within 
the purview of Section 188(1) of the Act were entered 
into during the year under review. Accordingly, the 
disclosure of Related Party Transactions as required 
in terms of Section 134 of the Act read with Rule 8 
of the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014 in Form 
AOC -2 is not applicable for this year.
DIRECTORS’ RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT
As required under Section 134 of the Companies Act, 
2013, your Directors confirm having:
a)	 followed in the preparation of the Annual Accounts, 
the applicable accounting standards with proper 
explanation relating to material departures, if any;
b)	 selected such accounting policies and applied 
them consistently and made judgements and 
estimates that are reasonable and prudent so as 
to give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of 
your Company at the end of the financial year and 
of the profit of your Company for that period; 
c)	 taken proper and sufficient care for the 
maintenance of adequate accounting records in 
accordance with the provisions of the Companies 
Act, 2013 for safeguarding the assets of your 
Company and for preventing and detecting fraud 
and other irregularities; 
d)	 prepared the Annual Accounts on a going concern 
basis;
e)	 laid down internal financial controls to be followed 
by your Company and that such internal financial 
controls were adequate and were operating 
effectively; and
f)	 devised proper systems to ensure compliance with 
the provisions of all applicable laws and that such 
systems were adequate and operating effectively.
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Your Company’s Board of Directors is responsible for 
the preparation of the consolidated financial statements 
of your Company and its Subsidiaries (‘the Group’), 
Associates and Joint Venture entities, in terms of the 
requirements of the Companies Act, 2013 (the Act) and 
in accordance with the accounting principles generally 
accepted in India, including the Indian Accounting 
Standards specified under Section 133 of the Act. 
The respective Boards of Directors of the companies 
included in the Group and of its associates and joint 
venture entities are responsible for maintenance of 
adequate accounting records in accordance with the 
provisions of the Act for safeguarding the assets of 
each company and for preventing and detecting frauds 
and other irregularities; the selection and application 
of appropriate accounting policies; making judgements 
and estimates that are reasonable and prudent; and the 
design, implementation and maintenance of adequate 
internal financial controls, that were operating effectively 
for ensuring the accuracy and completeness of the 
accounting records, relevant to the preparation and 
presentation of the financial statements that give a true 
and fair view and are free from material misstatement, 
whether due to fraud or error. Such financial statements 
have been used for the purpose of preparation of the 
consolidated financial statements by the Board of 
Directors of your Company, as aforestated.
OTHER INFORMATION
Compliance with the conditions of  
Corporate Governance 
The certificate from your Company’s Statutory 
Auditors, Messrs. S R B C & CO LLP, confirming 
compliance with the conditions of Corporate 
Governance as stipulated under the Listing 
Regulations, is annexed.
Going Concern status
There is no significant or material order passed during 
the year by any regulator, court or tribunal impacting 
the going concern status of your Company or its  
future operations.
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023 119
ITC Limited
Report of the Board of Directors

Annual Return
The Annual Return of your Company is  
available on its corporate website at   
https://www.itcportal.com/investor/disclosures-under-
SEBI.aspx .
Particulars of loans, guarantees or investments 
Details of loans or investments covered under the 
provisions of Section 186 of the Companies Act, 2013 
are provided in Notes 4, 5, and 9 to the Financial 
Statements. No guarantees were outstanding as at 
the year end.
Particulars relating to Conservation of Energy and 
Technology Absorption
Particulars as required under Section 134 of the 
Companies Act, 2013 relating to Conservation of 
Energy and Technology Absorption are also provided 
in the Annexure to this Report.
Compliance with Secretarial Standards
Your Company is in compliance with the applicable 
Secretarial Standards issued by the Institute of 
Company Secretaries of India and approved by the 
Central Government under Section 118(10) of the Act.
Employees
The total number of employees as on 31st March, 
2023, stood at 23,725. 
There were 282 employees, who were employed 
throughout the year and were in receipt of 
remuneration aggregating ` 102 lakhs or more or 
were employed for part of the year and were in receipt 
of remuneration aggregating ` 8.5 lakhs per month or  
more during the financial year ended 31st March, 2023. 
The information required under Section 197(12) of  
the Companies Act, 2013 and the Companies 
(Appointment and Remuneration of Managerial 
Personnel) Rules, 2014 is provided in the Annexure 
forming part of this Report.
Dividend Distribution Policy 
The Dividend Distribution Policy of your Company 
may be accessed on its corporate website  
at https://www.itcportal.com/about-itc/policies/dividend- 
distribution-policy.pdf .
Key Financial Ratios
Key Financial Ratios for the financial year ended  
31st March, 2023, are provided in the Annexure 
forming part of this Report.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Report contains forward-looking statements that 
involve risks and uncertainties. When used in this 
Report, the words ‘anticipate’, ‘believe’, ‘estimate’, 
‘expect’, ‘intend’, ‘will’ and other similar expressions as 
they relate to your Company and/or its Businesses are 
intended to identify such forward-looking statements. 
Your Company undertakes no obligation to publicly 
update or revise any forward-looking statements, 
whether as a result of new information, future 
events, or otherwise. Actual results, performances 
or achievements could differ materially from those 
expressed or implied in such forward-looking 
statements. Readers are cautioned not to place 
undue reliance on these forward-looking statements 
that speak only as of their dates. This Report should 
be read in conjunction with the financial statements 
included herein and the notes thereto.
CONCLUSION
Your Company’s ‘Triple Bottom Line’ philosophy has 
over the years spurred the creation of innovative 
business models that synergise the building of 
economic, environmental and social capital. It is  
now universally evident that enterprises of the future 
will not only have to be agile, consumer-centric, 
innovative and digital-first but also purpose-driven 
and responsibly competitive. Your Company’s 
superordinate goal of serving larger national priorities 
and creating value for all stakeholders has evolved 
into a new paradigm - ‘Responsible Competitiveness’ - 
that focuses on extreme competitiveness but in 
a manner that replenishes the environment and 
supports sustainable livelihoods. 
The strategic Vision of creating multiple drivers of 
growth through the pursuit of market opportunities  
that best match institutional strengths, has resulted  
in the development of strong Businesses of the future 
anchored on a portfolio of purpose-led brands,  
future-ready products and world-class quality. Today, 
120
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
Report of the Board of Directors

your Company is the leading FMCG marketer in India, 
a pre-eminent hotel chain and a globally acclaimed 
icon in green hoteliering, the clear market leader 
in the Indian Paperboards and Packaging industry, 
a pioneering trailblazer in farmer and rural 
empowerment through its Agri Business and a global 
exemplar in sustainable business practices. In the 
last two decades, your Company’s non-cigarettes 
businesses have grown over 31-fold and presently 
constitute over two-thirds of Net Segment Revenue. 
At the heart of this transformation lies the power of 
synergy, with seamless access for your Company’s 
new Businesses/initiatives to the deep and varied 
capabilities resident across different parts of the 
enterprise, and its world-class talent pool. 
An extensive strategy reset has been undertaken in 
recent years to architect the structural drivers that  
will power the ITC Next strategy of building a  
Future-Ready, Consumer-Centric, Climate Positive 
and Inclusive organisation anchored on the 
Responsible Competitiveness paradigm. 
In recent years, the FMCG Businesses have delivered 
strong revenue growth along with significant margin 
expansion, and are well poised to be rapidly scaled 
up. Multi-dimensional interventions have been made 
to strengthen the FMCG Businesses for sustained 
profitable growth. The product portfolio of your 
Company has been further strengthened in alignment 
with new opportunities and enterprise strengths 
with sharper focus on fortifying the core businesses, 
addressing adjacent opportunities leveraging Mother 
Brands and building emerging businesses for the 
future. To accentuate consumer-centricity, agility and 
enable sharper focus in the context of the growing 
scale and complexity of operations, the Branded 
Packaged Foods Businesses have been reorganised 
into product market centric clusters with integrated 
and empowered teams. Focused interventions 
made in the recent past have also augmented your 
Company’s multi-channel go-to-market capability, 
resulting in manifold expansion in the reach and 
availability of its products. Over the last five years, 
market and outlet coverage have grown 3.5x and 1.5x  
respectively while the network of stockists has 
expanded to 8.3x during the same period.  
Sharp-focused investments have augmented 
capability in emerging channels such as e-Commerce 
and Modern Trade, resulting in strong growth in 
sales and enhanced market standing. In addition, 
investments towards accelerating agile and 
purposeful innovation, optimising supply chain 
efficiencies, accelerated digital adoption, and 
strategic partnerships have significantly enhanced 
competitiveness. The impact of these multi-dimensional 
interventions is evident in the substantial margin 
expansion of 620 bps in Segment EBITDA over  
the last five years even in the face of severe 
inflationary headwinds. 
The FMCG Businesses will continue to leverage your 
Company’s institutional strengths as a key source 
of sustainable competitive advantage viz. strong 
backward linkages with the Agri Business, a deep 
& wide multi-channel distribution network, cuisine 
knowledge resident in the Hotels Business, packaging 
knowhow and the robust R&D platforms nurtured by 
LSTC. Structural advantages arising out of distributed 
manufacturing footprint, anchored on state-of-the-art  
ICMLs strategically located proximal to large 
demand centres, will be increasingly leveraged to 
drive rapid growth of the FMCG Businesses. With 
enhanced scale and margin expansion, the FMCG 
Businesses are expected to make increasingly 
higher contributions to your Company’s profit 
pool, thereby setting the stage for further value 
enhancement opportunities.
The Agri Business has been a strong backbone 
and a key source of competitive advantage for your 
Company’s FMCG and Cigarettes Businesses. The 
scope and scale of operations have grown manifold 
over the years and currently encompass over  
4.5 million tonnes of annual volume throughput in  
22 states and over 20 agri-value chains. In recent 
years, the Business has pivoted its strategic focus 
towards rapidly scaling up its Value-Added Agri 
Products portfolio to accelerate growth and margins. 
With policy enablers in place, your Company is 
developing NextGen agriculture value chains that are 
digitally enabled and climate smart, and re-structuring 
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023 121
ITC Limited
Report of the Board of Directors

the back-end into a robust network of Farmer 
Producer Organisations. This will further strengthen 
the sourcing network and facilitate the development 
of customised supply chains for traceable and 
identity-preserved sourcing of agri-commodities and 
in augmenting the product portfolio with the addition 
of value-added products such as staples for the Food 
Service segment, fresh and frozen fruits & vegetables, 
medicinal and aromatic plant extracts etc. Towards 
enhancing the competitiveness of domestic  
agri-value chains, fostering new business models 
and augmenting value creation opportunities, your 
Company has launched ITCMAARS – a crop-agnostic 
‘phygital’ full stack AgriTech platform integrating 
NextGen agri-technologies and solutions – to 
seamlessly deliver hyperlocal and personalised 
solutions to the farming community whilst creating 
new and scalable revenue streams and strengthening 
sourcing efficiencies.
The Paperboards, Paper and Packaging Businesses 
have made significant progress in recent years 
in terms of enhanced scale and profitability 
improvement. Strategic investments have been 
stepped up in areas such as pulp import substitution, 
proactive capacity augmentation in Value Added 
Paperboards segment, decarbonisation of operations, 
deployment of Industry 4.0 technologies and towards 
nurturing robust innovation platforms. The focus 
going forward is to fortify market leadership in the 
fast growing Value Added Paperboards segment by 
augmenting scale, driving cutting-edge innovation to 
rapidly scale up single use plastic substitutes as a 
new vector of growth, building structural advantage 
through product mix enrichment and scaling up the 
use of emergent technologies such as Industry 4.0 to 
enhance operational efficiency, reduce wastage  
and costs.
The Hotels Business has over the years established a 
strong footprint of iconic properties and F&B brands on 
the back of an investment-led growth strategy. In recent 
years, the strategy has been reset to pursue an  
‘asset-right’ growth path and augment revenue streams 
while simultaneously leveraging your Company’s  
world-class properties and iconic cuisine brands to 
drive growth. Investments have been stepped up 
to harness the power of Digital to enhance guest 
experience, efficiency and productivity across all nodes  
of the value chain. As reported earlier, your Company 
remains committed to implement its ‘asset-right’ 
strategy, focus on sweating existing assets, create 
additional revenue streams and pursue alternate 
structures in view of the strong industry recovery 
witnessed during the year towards engendering the next 
horizon of growth as also enhancing value creation. 
Your Company’s purposeful innovation engine across 
the portfolio of Businesses based on deep consumer 
insights, superior vectors of differentiation and agile 
execution capabilities remains a strong source of 
sustainable competitive advantage. The state-of-the-art 
Life Sciences & Technology Centre at Bengaluru, 
with its multi-dimensional science-based research 
platforms and centres of excellence, powers the 
innovation engine across your Company, and is 
effectively complemented through collaborations and 
partnerships with several prestigious institutions in 
India and across the world. 
Your Company continues to build a dynamic  
‘Future-Tech’ enterprise powered by state-of-the-art  
digital technologies and infrastructure across the 
value chain adding significant impetus to digital 
marketing, digital commerce, digital products and 
digital operations. Your Company today, is a pioneer 
in adoption of cutting-edge digital technologies across 
strategic impact areas spanning Intelligent new-age  
insights that reimagine Consumer Experience, 
Business Model Transformation, Smart Operations 
and Employee Experience. Foundational initiatives 
such as ‘DigiNext’ and ‘Young Digital Innovator’s 
Lab’ are accelerating your Company’s digital journey 
and inculcating a data driven and ‘digital first’ culture 
across the organisation.
Your Company is actively pursuing its Sustainability 2.0 
agenda which calls for inclusive strategies that can 
support sustainable livelihoods, pursue newer ways 
to fight climate change, enable the transition to a net 
zero economy, aid adaptation, work towards ensuring 
water security for all and create an effective circular 
economy. With its bold Sustainability 2.0 ambitions, 
122
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023
ITC Limited
Report of the Board of Directors

your Company is setting the bar higher with a  
multi-dimensional contribution to societal value 
creation, and remains committed to making a 
meaningful impact on the Nation’s future while 
retaining its status as a sustainability exemplar.
Disruptive business models and value propositions 
anchored at the intersection of future frontiers of 
Digitalisation and Sustainability form an integral part 
of your Company’s strategic roadmap going forward. 
NextGen business models such as ITCMAARS in 
the agri-ecosystem, tech-enabled cloud kitchens in 
the food service space, sustainable paperboards 
and packaging solutions customised for end-use with 
focus on single use plastic substitutes, are being 
piloted/progressed to actualise these opportunities. 
Value-accretive acquisitions, joint venture and 
collaborations continue to be proactively pursued 
towards accelerating growth and value creation.
The global operating environment has become 
increasingly complex, uncertain and volatile. In the 
wake of several upheavals witnessed over the last few 
years, there is now a spectre of ‘permacrisis’ i.e. an 
extended period of crisis from a series of extremely 
disruptive events, viz. pandemic, extreme weather 
events caused by climate change, geopolitical 
tensions, severe inflationary pressures. This is 
exacerbated by the phenomenon of ‘polycrisis’, 
signifying simultaneous occurrence of several crises. 
India remains one of the few bright spots in an 
increasingly volatile and unpredictable world. With 
structural drivers of growth firmly in place, India is 
firmly positioned to play a larger role on the global 
stage going forward. Your Company, with its robust 
and dynamic strategy pillars as aforestated, is well 
poised to rapidly scale up and enhance its market 
standing across operating segments.
The resilience, agility and adaptive capacity 
demonstrated by your Company is a testament to 
the talent, determination and untiring efforts of its 
pool of dedicated professionals, associates and 
partners. Your Company’s diverse talent pool of 
professional entrepreneurs, ‘proneurs’, have the 
unique opportunity to nurture categories, products and 
brands from ideation to execution. This talent pool is 
being harnessed not only to create winning products 
and services for today, but also to seize larger 
opportunities as they emerge from the expanding 
horizons of your Company’s Businesses.
Your Company’s Board and employees are inspired 
by the Vision of sustaining ITC’s position as one 
of India’s most admired and valuable companies, 
creating enduring value for all stakeholders, including 
the shareholders and the Indian society. The vision 
of enlarging your Company’s contribution to the 
Indian economy is driven by its ‘Nation First: Sab 
Saath Badhein’ credo anchored on the core values 
of Trusteeship, Transparency, Empowerment, 
Accountability and Ethical Citizenship, which are 
the cornerstones of your Company’s Corporate 
Governance philosophy. 
Inspired by this Vision, driven by Values and powered 
by internal Vitality, your Directors and employees 
look forward to the future with confidence and stand 
committed to creating an even brighter future for  
all stakeholders.
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2023 123
ITC Limited
Report of the Board of Directors
On behalf of the Board
S. PURI
Chairman & Managing Director
S. DUTTA
Director & Chief Financial Officer
Kolkata
18th May, 2023
