SOCIO-ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT
After two years of pandemic-led disruptions,
FY 2022-23 marked a return to normalcy in
operations. However, geopolitical tensions, continued
supply chain dislocations and climate crisis resulted
in unprecedented inflation and volatility in global
commodity and energy prices. Central banks across
the world responded swiftly with sharp increase in
interest rates within a relatively short time frame.
As per IMF estimates, global GDP growth slowed to
3.4% during 2022, well below projections made
at the beginning of the year. Growth in Advanced
Economies decelerated sharply to 2.7% in 2022
(Vs. 5.4% in 2021) while Emerging Markets &
Developing Economies grew at a relatively slower
pace of 4.0% (Vs. 6.9% in 2021), mainly impacted by
lower growth in China.
Going forward, the global macroeconomic
environment continues to be confronted with myriad
challenges; these include the continuing impact of
the Russia-Ukraine conflict, global inflation remaining
sticky and at elevated levels, recessionary pressures
in most Advanced Economies, spectre of stress
in the financial sector and the cost-of-living crisis in
several economies, especially in the near term. As per
IMF estimates, aggregate global economic growth
is expected to further decelerate to 2.8% in 2023.
Advanced Economies are projected to grow at 1.3%
with major economies such as the United States and
Euro Area set to grow at a slower pace than 2022.
Emerging Markets and Developing Economies are
estimated to grow by 3.9% in 2023 as against 4.0%
in 2022. As priority of policy makers currently centre
largely around inflation control, the monetary policies
of central banks would remain a key monitorable in
the near term.
The Indian economy remained a bright spot in
FY 2022-23 amidst the global slowdown. Real
GDP growth for the year is estimated at 7.0%
(first half: 9.6%; second half: 4.8%) with Nominal
GDP growth at 15.9% (first half: 22.3%; second half:
10.5%), reflecting the inflationary pressures in the
economy. While Agriculture grew by 3.3% in real
terms, Services and Industry sectors grew by 9.4%
and 3.6% respectively, on a soft base. With steep
inflation eating into household budgets, consumption
demand remained subdued in rural markets and for
discretionary categories in urban markets.
In spite of severe global headwinds, India remained
one of the fastest growing major economies enabled
by purposeful interventions by policy makers. The
Government of India has continued its thrust on
structural reforms to raise India’s potential growth.
During the year, concerted efforts continued
to be made towards shaping India as a global
manufacturing hub through policy initiatives such
as Production Linked Incentive (PLI), Make in India,
PM Gati Shakti, National Monetisation Pipeline
&
The Indian economy remained a bright spot in FY 2022-23 amidst the
global slowdown. The Government of India has continued its thrust
on structural reforms to raise India’s potential growth.
schemes and strengthening the country’s digital public
infrastructure as well as the healthcare infrastructure.
Further, astute management of macros including fiscal
and monetary policies also aided in mitigating the
volatility in the operating environment.
While the pace of growth of the Indian economy is
projected to decelerate in FY 2023-24 against the
backdrop of global macro headwinds as aforestated,
India would continue to be the fastest growing major
economy in the world. Even as inflation is projected to
soften on an overall basis, prices of certain
industry-specific commodities are expected to remain
elevated with continued geopolitical issues and supply
chain disruptions. The year is also expected to witness
‘El Nino’ weather phenomenon after three consecutive
‘La Nina’ years; the impact of this on monsoon,
along with related events like heatwaves, spatial and
temporal rainfall distribution etc. will remain a key
monitorable for agri output, inflation and consumer
demand in 2023. A good Rabi harvest, broad-based
credit growth and Government’s thrust on capital
spending to bolster investment activity supported by
buoyant tax collections, augur well for the economy
going forward. Healthier Bank and Corporate Balance
Sheets, improving capacity utilisation levels and
structural reforms represent some of the key positive
factors for revival in private capex.
India is widely acknowledged as one of the most
dynamic major economies in the world with immense
headroom for growth over the medium and long
term. A favourable demographic profile, increasing
affluence, rapid urbanisation and accelerated digital
adoption represent some of the key structural
drivers of growth of the Indian Economy. Policy
announcements in the Union Budget 2023 including
focus on expanding digital infrastructure, direct
benefit transfer, etc. are expected to provide further
impetus to enhance India’s competitiveness, enable
greater empowerment and foster inclusive growth
while maintaining the path to fiscal consolidation.
Sharp step-up in capital expenditure outlay, focus on
infrastructure and promotion of exports are expected
to boost domestic manufacturing, spurring a virtuous
consumption-investment-employment cycle.
As the Indian economy combats uncertainties in the
external environment, policy interventions focused
on supporting sustainable livelihoods and fostering
inclusive growth augur well for the economy.
Structural support would need to be provided to
sectors with large economic multiplier impact; the
development of robust domestic agri and wood-based
value chains hold special importance in the Indian
context given their enormous potential to contribute to
national objectives.
Agricultural sector plays a crucial role in the
economy with about half of the Indian workforce
engaged in the sector. As reported in earlier years,
enhancing agricultural productivity and value addition
to international standards, while simultaneously
improving market linkages, remain critical to enhance
the competitiveness of the agricultural sector
and drive significant increase in farmers’ income.
India is the leading producer worldwide of several
commodities, including pulses, spices, fruits such as
bananas, etc. While India’s agri exports have grown
sharply over the last few years to reach appx.
US$ 53 billion in FY 2022-23, its share of global
agri-trade remains low at only about 3%.
Agricultural sector plays a crucial role in the economy. Enhancing agricultural
productivity and value addition to international standards, while simultaneously
improving market linkages, remain critical to enhance the competitiveness
of the agricultural sector and drive significant increase in farmers’ income.
The Agri sector remains vulnerable to the vagaries
of climate change, facing considerable challenges
as a primary source for food, fuel, fibre, fodder and
livelihood security. According to an article in the
Harvard Business Review, global food demand is
expected to increase by up to 98% by 2050.
An exponential increase in production and productivity
will be required to meet the growing needs of
an increasing population at a time when natural
resources are fast depleting and the impact of climate
change is becoming more severe. Evolving consumer
preferences will also require nutritious food that is
sustainably sourced. These developments accentuate
the need to enhance the competitiveness of
agri-value chains in order to cater to the dynamic
market requirements of the future. India with its
tremendous strengths in agriculture has a unique
opportunity to play a leading role in this global
transition and in forging an eco-system of sustainable,
regenerative and climate smart agriculture.
Against this background, the Government’s initiative
to promote Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs)
as the core catalyst of agricultural transformation can
indeed leverage economies of scale, enable sustainable
agriculture, support market-led production and create
larger market access. FPOs provide the power of the
collective to small and marginal farmers. FPOs have
a tremendous potential to serve as major enablers in
augmenting farm livelihoods, by facilitating a crucial link
between markets and individual farmers.
In this context, your Company has adopted targeted
collaborative models to multiply the scale and impact
of its agri and rural interventions. This collaborative
approach, as opposed to a traditional transactional
approach, can contribute meaningfully towards
building next generation agriculture that is climate
resilient and capable of supporting gainful livelihoods.
Digitalisation of agriculture also offers the potential
to increase productivity and foster structural changes
across the value chain thereby enabling efficient use
of resources. In line with its commitment to harness
the power of cutting-edge digital technologies and
unlock the potential of India’s farmers, your Company
had launched ITCMAARS (Metamarket for Advanced
Agriculture and Rural Services). This ‘phygital’
ecosystem will empower the farming community
and FPOs by delivering hyperlocal and personalised
solutions by synergistically integrating NextGen
agri-technologies. Further details on this transformative
initiative are provided in the Agri Business section
of this report.
The Government of India has inspired the United
Nations to declare 2023 as the ‘International Year
of Millets’. This has indeed drawn global attention to
this ‘super-grain’ that has the potential to redefine
agriculture with its unique value proposition. Millets
are climate resilient crops using substantially lesser
water than other staples and grow in half the time as
other crops, offering a comprehensive solution for
sustained food security.
Your Company has spearheaded ‘ITC Mission Millets’,
leveraging its enterprise strengths in agriculture,
food and hospitality to implement multi-dimensional
interventions in this area. The holistic programme
follows a strategic 3-fold approach – 1) developing
a ‘good-for-you’ product portfolio, 2) implementing
sustainable farming systems, and 3) enhancing
consumer awareness through an Educate, Empower
and Encourage approach. Your Company has
implemented a focused strategy in crafting a millet
The Government of India has inspired the United Nations to declare 2023 as the
‘International Year of Millets’. Your Company has spearheaded ‘ITC Mission Millets’,
leveraging its enterprise strengths in agriculture, food and hospitality to
develop a ‘good-for-you’ product portfolio, implement sustainable
farming systems and enhance consumer awareness.
based products portfolio under its world-class Indian
brands for every occasion, age and format. To cater to
the diverse needs of consumers, your Company has
launched products across traditional and modern
formats viz. ‘Gluten Free Flour’, ‘Multi-Millet Mix’ and
‘Ragi Flour’, Vermicelli and Biscuits under the
‘Aashirvaad’ and ‘Sunfeast’ brands. Your Company
has also designed products that suit every meal
occasion like millet idlis for breakfast, biscuits & cookies
for snacking and noodles & pasta for other meals.
The thrust on millets is further exemplified by the Hotels
Business creating easy-to-try recipes with millets to help
encourage individuals experiment with the taste and
texture of millets.
In line with your Company’s commitment to empower
farmers, your Company has developed a millets
agri-value chain with special thrust on enhancing
value-addition and market linkages. Your Company
is also promoting FPOs in millet farming anchored
by ITCMAARS. The Agri Business Division has
implemented two Public-Private Partnerships projects
in Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh, in partnership
with Indian Institute of Millets Research (IIMR),
Hyderabad. Your Company remains committed to
supporting the Government’s efforts to promote millets
given their immense benefits in terms of nutritional
properties and attributes as a planet friendly and
climate resilient crop.
It is pertinent to note that a substantial quantum of
food is wasted along the chain in India, depending on
the inherent perishability of the crop and the season.
Higher levels of food processing in the economy can
create a much larger pull for quality agri-commodities,
thereby reducing farm wastages and raising farm
incomes. This would require focused investments
in developing product-specific climate-controlled
infrastructure as well as in branded products that
benefit large agri-value chains. Corporate participation
is essential not only to invest in requisite infrastructure,
but also to provide assured market linkages to
farmers. A big thrust on India’s Food Processing
sector can play a pivotal role and have a multiplier
effect which will lead to significant job creation,
enhance rural incomes and help manage food
inflation in a sustainable manner. In this context,
the recently announced PLI Scheme for the Food
Processing sector, with an estimated outlay of
` 10900 crores, is expected to play a critical role in
boosting investments, agri exports, farmer incomes,
employment generation and building Indian brands for
the global market. Your Company has been included
under the scheme for several of its Branded Packaged
Foods Businesses and in the Agri Business, details of
which are provided in the subsequent sections.
Similarly, the Agro-forestry sector, as a source of
raw material for wood-based industry, is woefully
constrained by policies that not only impede job
creation in India but also promote avoidable imports.
Recent policy interventions to enable greening of
wastelands and providing financial assistance to
members of marginalised communities taking up
Agro-forestry is a commendable starting point to
reverse this situation. Supportive policies in this
area would go a long way in enhancing sustainable
livelihoods, augmenting alternative sources of
energy (bio-fuel) and enabling import substitution
for wood-based industries while simultaneously
augmenting the Nation’s environmental capital.
The integrated nature of your Company’s
business models along with strategic investments
to enhance efficiencies across its operating
A big thrust on India’s Food Processing sector can play a pivotal role and have a
multiplier effect. The recently announced PLI Scheme for this sector is expected
to play a critical role in boosting investments, agri exports, farmer incomes,
employment generation and building Indian brands for the global market.
Your Company has been included under the scheme for several of its
Foods Businesses as well as Agri Business.
segments - including agri-commodity sourcing
expertise for the Branded Packaged Foods
Businesses and cost-competitive fibre supply chain
along with in-house pulp manufacturing capability of
the Paperboards & Specialty Papers Business – is
a key source of competitive advantage, especially
against the backdrop of severe inflationary
headwinds. Each of your Company’s Businesses
derive benefits of synergy with seamless access to
the deep & varied capabilities across different parts
of the enterprise. Your Company’s interventions
across operating segments are aligned to the
national priorities of enhancing competitiveness of
Indian agriculture and industry, generating
large-scale employment opportunities and supporting
sustainable livelihoods, driving import substitution,
creating national brands to maximise value
capture in India, accelerating growth in tourism,
increasing Indian agri exports and promoting
sustainable business practices. Investments made
by your Company continue to be guided by the
national objectives of ‘Make in India’ and
‘Doubling Farmers’ Income’ and the overarching
theme of ‘AatmaNirbhar Bharat’ that seeks to make
the country stronger, resilient and more competitive.
The collaboration with NITI Aayog, aimed at boosting
agricultural and allied activities in 27 aspirational
districts of eight states under the Aspirational
Districts programme, advanced to its second
phase in FY 2022-23. During the year, over 10 lakh
farmers were trained on package of practices for
principal crops of the region as well as on livestock
management, taking the cumulative number of farmer
interactions to over 44 lakh. Estimates indicate yield
improvement of up to 30% for cotton, maize, paddy
and soyabean in locations covered by the programme;
similarly, cost of cultivation is estimated to have
reduced by nearly 15%, resulting in expansion of
farmer incomes by up to 60%.
Your Company has also partnered with the State
Government of Andhra Pradesh towards improving
the quality of chilli produced in the country to meet
global standards. A Public Private Partnership
programme - ‘Integrated Agri-Extension Platform for
Chilli Farm Value Chain Development’ - has been
conceptualised under which 40,000 farmers covering
about 1,00,000 acres are expected to be benefited
by 2025. In FY 2022-23, the programme covered
over 17,500 farmers and over 72,600 acres across
135 villages. Improved quality, farm productivity and
higher share of farm gate sales enabled farmers
covered under the project to generate additional
income.
Your Company is working towards developing village
level institutions and fostering micro entrepreneurship
by promoting custom hiring centres for farm
mechanisation, post-harvest product management
infrastructure and community managed seed
banks for self-reliance in quality seed material.
Environmentally sustainable farm practices, including
zero-till sowing of wheat, direct seeding of rice,
micro-irrigation and watershed development, continue
to be promoted.
The farm sector faces enormous threats arising
out of climate change as evident from the growing
number of extreme weather events such as droughts
and floods. Given the vulnerabilities, it is critical to
strengthen climate resilience and adaptability of the
agri-food sector. In this context, your Company’s
interventions in collaboration with CGIAR’s
‘Climate Change and Food Security Programme’
Investments made by your Company continue to be guided by the
national objectives of ‘Make in India’ and ‘Doubling Farmers’ Income’ and
the overarching theme of ‘AatmaNirbhar Bharat’ that seeks to make
to build climate smart villages were expanded to
over 4,800 villages across 11 states covering
10 lakh acres and supported farmers in the
management of risks arising from erratic and extreme
weather events. Further, according to CGIAR’s
estimates, your Company’s Climate Smart Village
intervention in Madhya Pradesh demonstrated average
increase in yield of 38% and 15% in soyabean and
wheat respectively, over the baseline. Reduction
in cost of cultivation along with yield improvement
led to an increase in net income by 93% in soyabean
and 46% in wheat over the baseline and average
Green House Gas emissions reduced by 66%
for soyabean and 13% for wheat as compared
to the baseline.
In Kapurthala District, Punjab, your Company under
its flagship programme of ‘ITC Mission Sunehra Kal’
has, over the last five years, implemented solutions
that have effectively substituted the burning of paddy
stubble by farmers. During the year, the programme
covered 2.5 lakh acres with appx. 92.5% of the area
(2.3 lakh acres) witnessing total stoppage of stubble
burning, thereby avoiding appx. 1.8 lakh tonnes of
carbon release into the atmosphere.
Although India has appx. 18% of the world population,
its share of natural resources is disproportionately low
with only 2% of global land mass, 4% of freshwater
resources and 2% of forest resources. It is more
critical than ever before to redouble efforts, both at the
national and corporate level, to fashion strategies that
foster sustainable, equitable and inclusive growth.
It is your Company’s belief that businesses can bring
about transformational change by pursuing innovative
business models that synergise the creation of
sustainable livelihoods and the preservation of natural
capital while enhancing shareholder value.
This ‘Triple Bottom Line’ approach to creating larger
‘stakeholder value’, as opposed to merely focusing
on uni-dimensional ‘shareholder value’ creation,
is the driving force that defines your Company’s
sustainability vision and its growth path into the future.
Your Company is a global exemplar in ‘Triple Bottom
Line’ performance. The focus on creating unique
business models that generate substantial livelihoods
across the value chains has led to your Company’s
Businesses supporting over six million sustainable
livelihoods, many of whom belong to the weaker
sections of society.
Your Company sustained its ‘AA’ rating by MSCI-ESG
for the fifth successive year - the highest amongst
global tobacco companies. Your Company has
also been included in the Dow Jones Sustainability
Emerging Markets Index for the third year in a
row – a reflection of being a sustainability leader
in the industry and a recognition of its continued
commitment to people and planet. Your Company has
also been rated at the ‘Leadership Level’ score of
‘A-’ for both Climate Change and Water Security
(Asia and Global average at ‘C’ for climate change
and ‘B’ for water security) by CDP, a reputed
independent global platform for disclosures on
environmental impacts.
As a testament to your Company’s ‘Triple Bottom Line’
philosophy and Responsible Luxury ethos, all major
hotel properties of your Company are LEED Platinum
certified, making your Company a trailblazer in green
hoteliering globally. ITC Grand Chola, the 600-key
super-premium luxury hotel complex in Chennai, is
amongst the world’s largest LEED Platinum certified
green hotels. In 2020, ITC Windsor’s best practices
Your Company sustained its ‘AA’ rating by MSCI-ESG for the 5th successive year -
the highest amongst global tobacco companies. Your Company has also been
included in the Dow Jones Sustainability Emerging Markets Index for the 3rd year
in a row – a reflection of being a sustainability leader and a recognition
of its continued commitment to people and planet.
on carbon management distinguished it as the first
hotel in the world to be LEED Zero Carbon certified.
Since then, 11 more ITC Hotels have been certified
as LEED Zero Carbon. ITC Mughal became the first
hotel globally to be awarded the LEED Zero Water
Certification by the U.S. Green Building Council
(USGBC), followed by ITC Sonar, which is the second
hotel to be awarded the certification globally. Further,
your Company’s ‘Sankhya’ data centre in Bengaluru
became the first data centre in the world to be
awarded the LEED Zero Carbon certification. Also,
the Kovai unit of your Company is the first site in India
and the first paper mill in the world to achieve the
highest platinum rating under the ‘Alliance for Water
Stewardship Standards’.
Your Company has been championing the urgent
need to combat climate change for building a more
secure future and the role it can play in enabling
a net-zero economy. Your Company continues
to pursue a low carbon growth strategy through
extensive decarbonisation programmes across its
value chain whilst also developing adaptation plans
across its sites. Your Company is the only enterprise
in the world of comparable dimensions to have
achieved and sustained the three key global indices of
environmental sustainability of being ‘water positive’
(for 21 years), ‘carbon positive’ (for 18 years), and
‘solid waste recycling positive’ (for 16 years). With
its bold Sustainability 2.0 agenda, your Company is
setting the bar even higher, and remains committed to
making a meaningful contribution across all the three
sectors of the economy – Agri, Manufacturing and
Services, while retaining its status as a sustainability
exemplar. Further details on this subject are available
in the Sustainability section of this Report.
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
Against the backdrop of a challenging operating
environment as stated earlier, your Company’s
consumer centricity, agility in seizing market
opportunities, focus on execution excellence and
proactive strategic interventions enabled it to post
strong performance across all operating segments.
Overall for FY 2022-23, Gross Revenue at ` 69480.89
crores increased by 17.6%, while EBITDA increased
by 26.5% to ` 23944.47 crores. Profit Before Tax
and Exceptional items at ` 24677.54 crores grew by
24.4% over previous year and Profit After Tax stood at
` 18753.31 crores (previous year ` 15057.83 crores).
Total Comprehensive Income for the year stood at
` 18782.57 crores (previous year ` 15631.68 crores).
Earnings Per Share for the year stood at ` 15.15
(previous year ` 12.22).
–
The FMCG-Others Segment registered strong
growth amidst subdued demand conditions.
Robust growth was witnessed across all major
categories of Branded Packaged Foods viz.
Staples, Biscuits, Snacks, Noodles, Beverages.
While ‘Fiama’ and ‘Vivel’ range of Personal Wash
products and ‘Engage’ Fragrances performed
well, the Hygiene portfolio witnessed moderation
in demand with the ebbing of the effects of the
pandemic, while remaining well ahead of
pre-pandemic levels. In the Education &
Stationery Products Business, notebook sales
registered sharp growth with resumption of
educational institutions. The Incense Sticks
(Agarbattis) Business witnessed robust recovery
during the year after two years of pandemic
induced disruptions. Segment Revenue for the year
grew by 19.6% with Segment EBITDA growing
Against the backdrop of a challenging operating environment,
your Company’s consumer centricity, agility in seizing market opportunities,
focus on execution excellence and proactive strategic interventions
enabled it to post strong performance across all operating segments.
at a faster pace of 34.9% to ` 1953.97 crores.
Segment EBITDA margins expanded by
120 bps amidst severe inflationary pressures.
The Businesses continued to drive improvement
in profitability through multi-pronged interventions
viz. premiumisation, supply chain agility, judicious
pricing actions, digital initiatives, strategic cost
management and fiscal incentives.
The FMCG-Cigarettes Segment witnessed
sustained claw back of volumes from illicit trade
on the back of deterrent actions by enforcement
agencies and relative stability in taxes. Market
standing continued to be reinforced through
focused portfolio/market interventions and
agile execution.
The Hotels Segment witnessed a stellar recovery
during the year, clocking robust growth in
Revenue and Profits buoyed by weddings, leisure
and MICE (Meeting, Incentives, Conferencing,
Exhibition) segments along with progressive
pick-up in business travel. Segment Revenue
doubled over FY 2021-22 and stood at 1.4x of
pre-pandemic levels. Segment EBITDA margin
stood at 32.2% representing an expansion of
930 bps over FY 2019-20.
The Agri Business Segment delivered a resilient
performance with Segment Revenue and Results
growing by 12.2% and 28.8% respectively.
Restrictions imposed on wheat & rice exports
impacted Segment Revenue. Margin expansion
was driven by leaf tobacco exports and
value-added agri products.
The Paperboards, Paper & Packaging Segment
demonstrated strong performance during the year
on the back of robust growth across end-user
segments; Segment Revenue and Segment
Results grew by 18.8% and 34.9% respectively.
Segment margins expanded by appx. 300 bps,
leveraging the integrated nature of the business
model, Industry 4.0, digital interventions and
strategic investments in pulp import substitution
and proactive capacity augmentation in
Value Added Paperboards segment.
The operating environment in the last three financial
years has been extremely challenging due to
disruptions caused by the pandemic, unprecedented
inflationary pressures and sluggish demand
conditions, amongst others.
It is heartening to note that, powered by the
ITC Next Strategy of building a Future-Ready,
Consumer Centric, Climate Positive and Inclusive
organisation anchored on the paradigm of
‘Responsible Competitiveness’, your Company has
emerged stronger and enhanced its competitiveness
across operating segments through this period,
and sustained its position as a global exemplar
in Sustainability.
The Directors of your Company are pleased to
recommend a Special Dividend of ` 2.75 per share
in addition to the Final Dividend of ` 6.75 per share
for the financial year ended 31st March, 2023.
Together with the Interim Dividend of ` 6.00 per share
paid on 3rd March, 2023, the total Dividend for the
financial year ended 31st March, 2023 amounts to
` 15.50 per share (previous year ` 11.50 per share).
Total cash outflow on account of Dividend (including
Interim Dividend of ` 7448.41 crores paid in
March 2023) will be ` 19255.02 crores.
Powered by the ITC Next Strategy of building a Future-Ready,
Consumer Centric, Climate Positive and Inclusive organisation anchored on the
paradigm of ‘Responsible Competitiveness’, your Company has emerged stronger,
enhanced its competitiveness across operating segments and sustained
its position as a global exemplar in Sustainability.